16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
Overview for Energy Simulations
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ››
16.1 Air System Simulation Reports
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ››
Overview for Air System Simulation Reports Dialog
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.1 Air System Simulation Reports ››
This chapter explains the contents of energy simulation reports in HAP.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Overview for Energy Simulations
Building energy simulations are typically used to estimate and then compare annual energy use and energy cost for alternate building or
equipment designs. In other cases simulations are run for a single design to study off-design or part-load performance of systems or
equipment.
An energy simulation involves hour-by-hour calculations for all 8,760 hours in a "typical" year for the following:
1. Dynamic heat flow in the building. These calculations determine cooling and heating demands for the conditioned spaces in the building.
2. Thermal and mechanical behavior of air systems and associated equipment. Mathematical simulations of the air handling systems are
used to determine the cooling and heating coil loads. Simulations are also used to determine energy use by packaged DX cooling, split
DX cooling, heat pump, combustion heating and electric resistance heating equipment.
3. Thermal and mechanical behavior of plant equipment. Mathematical simulations are used to estimate the energy use by plant components
such as chillers, boilers, pumps and cooling towers.
4. Total energy use and energy cost. Energy use data generated by the air system and plant simulations, plus miscellaneous energy use
specified by the user is compiled to define the hour-by-hour consumption profiles for each energy source and fuel type. The utility rate
structures are used with the energy consumption profiles to compute the utility bill for each energy source and fuel type. And this
determines the total energy cost for a building scenario.
In HAP you do not explicitly "run simulations". Rather you request simulation reports. The program determines whether simulations are
needed to supply data for the reports. If data was previously calculated and stored, reports are provided immediately. If data was not
previously calculated, then simulations run before the reports are generated.
A building energy simulation is typically performed by requesting building simulation reports. If calculations are needed, the program will
automatically run simulations for the air systems and plants in the building, and then will compile energy use and costs. However, complete
or partial simulations can be run in a variety of ways:
1. If you choose air system simulation reports, only the air system simulations will be run.
2. If you choose plant simulation reports, only simulations for the plant and any systems served by the plant will be run.
3. If you choose building simulation reports, simulations for the building and any plants and systems in the building will be run.
For further information about simulation reports, click on any of the following.
Air System Simulation Reports
Plant Simulation Reports
Building Simulation Reports
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
This section describes the contents of air system simulation reports.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Overview for Air System Simulation Reports Dialog
About System Simulation Reports. System Simulation Reports contain load and equipment performance data produced by the hour-by-
hour simulation of system operation for one year. This information is useful for learning about equipment operation and also when
investigating energy consumption patterns. HAP offers five different system simulation reports, three of which can be generated in tabular,
graphical or text file format. The latter is used for exporting data to external programs such as spreadsheets. Note that simulation reports are
only available in the full edition of HAP and not in HAP System Design Loads.
Page 1 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
Using various menu options and toolbar buttons in HAP, there are four different ways of generating system simulation reports. These
methods are described in the Generating System Simulation Reports topic. All four procedures require selection of report option on the
System Simulation Reports dialog shown below.
The System Simulation Reports Dialog is used to specify which reports should be generated and how they should be generated. The form
is divided into 3 sections:
1. The Report Selection Area in the upper portion of the dialog contains a table used to select report options. Each row in this table
contains specifications for a different report. Columns contain separate specifications for each report:
a. The Table column is used to select the tabular version of a report. Place a check mark in the box opposite the report name to select
this version of the report.
b. The Graph column is used to select the graphical version of a report. Place a check mark in the box opposite the report name to select
this version of the report. Note that you must also use the Graph Selection area of the dialog to choose the data items you wish to plot.
c. The CSV column is used to generate a simple text version of the report in Comma Separated Value (CSV) format. Data in this format
can be opened in spreadsheet programs. This is sometimes useful when you want to generate custom graphs of data or perform
further calculations with program results. Note: The CSV file generated with this option is written into the current project folder. A
message window appears before the file is generated to indicate the location of the file.
d. The Time Specifications column describes how individual reports should be generated. For the Daily Simulation Results report, users
must select a single month. For the Hourly Simulation Results report, users must select a start and end day for the report.
The contents of each system simulation report are summarized later in this help topic.
2. The Graph Selection Area in the lower portion of the dialog contains a scrollable list used to select the data to be plotted in any graphical
reports you select. Each item in the list contains the name of the data item and its units of measure. The items found on this list are
specific to the currently selected system and often differ from one system to the next based on the system type and the components the
system uses. To select a data item, place a check mark in the box next to the item.
Example: In the figure above, if Central Cooling Coil Load and Preheat Coil Load are selected, then all graphical reports selected will plot
these two data items.
Graph reports may contain up to three data items chosen from the list as long as the data items use the same units of measure. For
example, Central Cooling Coil Load and Preheat Coil Load can both be selected for a graph because they have the same units of
measure. Central Cooling Coil Load and Central Unit Clg Input cannot be selected because they use different units of measure.
Readers should note that graph options are only available if a single system was selected and simulation results already exist for the
system. Otherwise, graph options and this graph selection area will be disabled. If you wish to graph data for a system that has not yet
been simulated, generate tabular reports to cause simulation calculations to run. Then return to the Reports Selection dialog and request
graphical reports for the system.
3. Command Buttons appear along the bottom of the form. Five buttons are provided:
a. Press Restore Defaults to reset selections on the dialog to a standard set of defaults. This is often done when users wish to clear
existing selections and then begin selecting reports all over again.
Page 2 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
Monthly, Daily, Hourly Simulation Results for Air Systems
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.1 Air System Simulation Reports ››
b. Press Print to print the tabular and graphical reports you’ve selected. Reports are printed directly without viewing them first. Note that
TXT reports will always be written to disk files and will not be printed.
c. Press Preview to view the tabular and graphical reports you’ve selected. This launches the HAP Report Viewer and displays the
reports you requested. The HAP Report Viewer provides options for the printing the reports as well as saving the reports as disk files in
Rich Text (RTF) format. Note that TXT reports will always be written to disk files and will not be displayed.
d. Press Cancel to exit from the dialog and return to the HAP main window without generating reports.
e. Press Help to display this help topic.
Report Summaries. HAP offers five different system simulation reports. Each report is summarized below.
1. The Monthly Simulation Results report contains monthly and annual totals of loads and energy consumption for the system. Length -
Tabular: 1 to 2 pages, Graphical: 1 page.
2. The Daily Simulation Results report contains daily totals of loads and energy consumption for one month for the system. The month is
selected by the user in the Time Specification column of the dialog. Length - Tabular: 1 to 3 pages, Graphical: 1 page.
3. The Hourly Simulation Results report contains hourly profiles of loads and energy consumption for the system for a series of consecutive
days selected by the user. Length - Tabular: 1 to 3 pages per day, Graphical: 1 page.
4. The Unmet Loads report provides information about the operating hours per month for equipment components and hours during which
equipment capacity was insufficient to meet the system load. This report is useful for identifying operating problems in the simulation and
also for learning about hours of equipment operation. Length – 1 to 2 pages.
5. The Zone Temperature report provides statistics about air temperatures in zones served by the air system. This data is useful for
identifying control problems during the simulation such as when the system is unable to maintain comfort conditions. It is also useful for
identifying maximum and minimum temperature levels in conditioned areas. Length : 1 to 4 pages.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Monthly, Daily, Hourly Simulation Results for Air Systems
This topic describes the contents of the Monthly, Daily and Hourly Simulation Results reports for air systems. All three reports contain results
from the hour-by-hour energy simulation for an air system.
1. The Monthly Simulation Results report contains monthly and annual totals of loads and energy consumption for the system. Length -
Tabular: 1 to 2 pages, Graphical: 1 page.
2. The Daily Simulation Results report contains daily totals of loads and energy consumption for one month for the system. The month is
selected by the user in the Time Specification column of the dialog. Length - Tabular: 1 to 3 pages, Graphical: 1 page.
3. The Hourly Simulation Results report contains 24-hour profiles of loads and energy consumption for the system for a series of
consecutive days selected by the user. Length - Tabular: 1 to 3 pages per day, Graphical: 1 page.
Three versions of each report are also offered:
1. The Table version of the report presents data in a tabular format with one column for each category of load or performance data.
2. The Graph version of the report plots profiles for up to three data items chosen by the user.
3. The CSV version of the report is a text version of the tabular report and is written to a Comma Separated Value (CSV) file. This version of
the report is used when exporting data to a spreadsheet program. Each CSV report is written into the current project folder. For easy
identification, the name of the disk file includes the type of data (Monthly, Daily, Hourly) and the name of the air system. Once the file has
been created it can be imported by a spreadsheet program.
Glossary of Data. The content of these simulation reports varies based on the system type and the components it uses. A glossary of all
data column titles found on System Simulation Results reports is provided below. Items are arranged in functional groups similar to the
groupings of columns found on the reports.
Central Cooling
a. Central Cooling Coil Load – Load for the central cooling coil.
b. Central Cooling Eqpt Load – Cooling output for an air-cooled or water-cooled DX unit serving the central cooling coil. If the Equipment
Load is less than the Coil Load it indicates an unmet load condition.
c. Central Unit Clg Input – Input power for an air-cooled or water-cooled DX unit serving the central cooling coil. For air-cooled equipment
this is the sum of compressor and outdoor fan power. For water-cooled equipment it is the compressor power only.
Central Heating
a. Central Heating Coil Load – Load for the central heating coil.
b. Central Heating Eqpt Load – Heating output for a combustion heating unit or an air source heat pump serving the central heating coil.
For a combustion unit, if the Equipment Load is less than the Coil Load it indicates the heater capacity is insufficient to meet the load.
For a heat pump, if the Equipment Load less than the Coil Load indicates the heat pump does not have sufficient capacity to meet the
load. For such a condition, auxiliary heat will be used to supplement the heat pump in order to meet the load.
c. Central Unit Htg Input – Compressor and outdoor fan power for an air source heat pump unit serving the central heating coil.
Page 3 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
d. Central Heating Coil Input – For electric resistance heating: the input power to the heating coil. For combustion heating: the energy
content of fuel burned.
e. Central Heating Misc. Electric – Miscellaneous electric power for a combustion heating unit serving the central heating coil. Typically
this represents combustion blower or fuel oil pump power.
f. Central Unit Aux. Htg. Load – The load on the auxiliary heater in an air source heat pump system.
g. Central Unit Aux. Htg Input – The energy input for the auxiliary heater. For electric heating this is the input power for the auxiliary
heating coil. For combustion heating it is the energy content of fuel burned.
h. Central Unit Aux. Htg. Misc. Electric – Miscellaneous electric power for a combustion heating unit serving as the auxiliary heater.
Typically this represents combustion blower or fuel oil pump power.
Fans
a. Exhaust Fan – Power for exhaust fan used to exhaust ventilation air in a dedicated outdoor air system (DOAS) serving a fan coil or
water-source heat pump system.
b. Hot Deck Supply Fan – Power for the hot deck supply fan in a 2-Fan Dual Duct VAV system.
c. Return Fan – Power for the return fan in a central system.
d. Supply Fan – Power for the supply fan in a central system.
e. Terminal Fan – Total fan power for terminal units. In VAV systems this is the sum of fan power for all series and parallel fan powered
mixing box terminals. For DX fan coil, hydronic fan coil and water source heat pump systems this is the sum of fan power for all fan coil
or heat pump units in the system.
f. Ventilation Fan – Power for the ventilation fan in a dedicated outdoor air system (DOAS) serving a fan coil or water source heat pump
system.
g. Zone Exhaust Fan – Power for fans used to directly exhaust air from zones in a central system.
h. Zone Heating Unit Fan – Power for fans in supplemental zone heating units used with central systems.
Humidifier
a. Humidifier Input – Input power for a self-contained humidifier unit.
b. Humidifier Load – For a self-contained humidifier unit this is the humidification steam load in lb/hr (kg/hr). For direct steam injection and
heated pan humidifier units this is the humidification load imposed on the central boiler in MBH (kW).
Precool Coil
a. Precool Coil Load – In a central system this is the load for a precool coil. For a dedicated outdoor air system (DOAS) unit used with a
fan coil or WSHP system, this is the load for the ventilation cooling coil.
b. Precool Eqpt Load – Cooling output for the air-cooled DX unit serving the precool coil, or for the WSHP unit serving the cooling coil in a
DOAS unit.
c. Precool Unit Clg Input – Input power for the equipment serving the precool coil. For an air-cooled DX unit this is the compressor plus
outdoor fan power. For a WSHP unit this is the compressor power only.
Preheat Coil
a. Preheat Coil Load – In a central system this is the load for a preheat coil. For a dedicated outdoor air system (DOAS) unit used with a
fan coil or WSHP system, this is the load for the ventilation heating coil.
b. Preheat Eqpt Load – Heating output for a combustion heater serving the preheat coil or for a WSHP unit serving the heating coil in a
DOAS unit.
c. Preheat Unit Htg Input – Compressor input power for a WSHP unit serving the heating coil in a DOAS unit.
d. Preheat Coil Input – For electric resistance heating: the input power for the preheat coil. For combustion heating: the energy content of
fuel burned.
e. Preheat Heating Misc. Electric – Miscellaneous electric power for a combustion heating unit serving the preheat coil. Typically this
represents combustion blower or fuel oil pump power.
f. Preheat Unit Aux Htg Load – Auxiliary heating load for a WSHP unit serving the heating coil in a DOAS unit. Note that a WSHP unit only
contains an auxiliary heating coil if it is used in an open-loop system.
g. Preheat Unit Aux Htg. Input – Electric input power for the auxiliary heating coil in a WSHP unit serving the heating coil in a DOAS unit.
Terminal Cooling
a. Terminal Cooling Coil Load – Total cooling coil load for terminal units. In an induction system this is the sum of induction terminal
cooling coils. In a DX fan coil or hydronic fan coil system this is the sum of cooling coil loads for the fan coil units in the system.
b. Terminal Cooling Eqpt Load – Total cooling output for DX fan coils in a system. If this Equipment Load is less than the Coil Load it
indicates capacity was insufficient for one or more terminal units in the system.
c. Terminal Unit Clg Input – Total input power for DX fan coils in a system. This is the compressor plus outdoor fan power.
Terminal Heating
a. Terminal Heating Coil Load – Total load for terminal heating coils in a system. For central systems this is the sum of terminal reheat coil
loads. For induction systems this is the sum of heating loads for induction terminals. For DX fan coil or hydronic fan coil systems it is
the sum of fan coil heating loads.
Page 4 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
Zone Temperature Report for Air Systems
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.1 Air System Simulation Reports ››
b. Terminal Heating Eqpt Load – Total heating output for combustion heating units or air source heat pumps in terminal fan coil units. For
combustion, if the Equipment Load is less than the Coil Load it indicates the heating capacity is insufficient to meet the load for one or
more fan coil units. For heat pumps, if the Equipment Load is less than the Coil Load it indicates the heat pump capacity is insufficient
to meet the load. The auxiliary heater will supply the remainder of the heat.
c. Terminal Unit Htg Input – Total compressor plus outdoor fan power for terminal air source heat pump units.
d. Terminal Heating Coil Input – Total energy input for electric resistance or combustion heating units. For terminal reheat coils and for fan
coil units this is the sum of electric power user for all terminals in the system. For combustion heating this is the energy content of fuel
burned by all terminal fan coils.
e. Terminal Unit Heating Misc. Electric – Miscellaneous power used by combustion heating units for terminal fan coils. This typically
represents combustion blower or fuel oil pump power.
f. Terminal Unit Aux. Htg Load – Total auxiliary heating load for terminal heat pump units in a system.
g. Terminal Unit Aux. Htg. Input – Total electric power used for auxiliary heating for terminal heat pump units.
Ventilation Reclaim
a. Vent Reclaim Device – Input power for a ventilation reclaim device. Examples: Motor input power for a heat wheel; pump input power
for a pump-around loop.
Water Source Heat Pumps
a. WSHP Cooling Coil Load – Total cooling coil load for WSHP units in the system.
b. WSHP Eqpt Cooling Load – Total cooling output for WSHP units doing cooling duty. If this Equipment Load is less than the Coil Load it
indicates one or more WSHP units have insufficient capacity to meet the load.
c. WSHP Clg Compressor – Total compressor input power for WSHP units doing cooling duty.
d. WSHP Heating Coil Load – Total heating coil load for WSHP units in the system.
e. WSHP Eqpt Heating Load – Total heating output for WSHP units doing heating duty. If this Equipment Load is less than the Coil Load,
it indicates one or more WSHP units have insufficient capacity to meet the load. In an open-loop WSHP system this deficit will be made
up by electric auxiliary heat. In a closed-loop WSHP system the deficit cannot be made up and will be reported as an unmet load.
f. WSHP Htg Compressor – Total compressor input power for WSHP units doing heating duty.
g. Cooling Tower Fan – Input power for cooling tower fan motors. Only applicable for WSHP loop systems.
h. WSHP Loop Water Pump – Input power for the loop water pumps.
i. Boiler Output – Heating provided by the auxiliary boiler. Only applicable for closed-loop systems.
j. Boiler Input – Energy input for the auxiliary boiler. For electric boilers this is the electric power for the boiler. For combustion boilers this
is the energy content of fuel burned. Only applicable for closed-loop systems.
k. Boiler Misc. Electric – Miscellaneous electric power for a combustion auxiliary boiler. Typically this represents power for a combustion
blower or a fuel oil pump. Only applicable for closed-loop systems.
l. WSHP Aux Htg Load – Total auxiliary heating load for WSHP units doing heating duty. Applicable for GSHP and GWSHP systems.
m. WSHP Aux Htg Input – Total input power for electric auxiliary heaters. Applicable for GSHP and GWSHP systems.
Zone Heating Units
a. Zone Heating Unit Load – Total heating load for supplemental zone heating units (e.g. baseboard or fan coil units).
b. Zone Heating Coil Input – Total input power for supplemental zone heating units which use electric resistance heat.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Zone Temperature Report for Air Systems
The Zone Temperature Report provides statistics about air temperatures in zones served by the air system. This data is useful for identifying
control problems during the simulation such as when the system is unable to maintain comfort conditions. It is also useful for identifying
maximum and minimum temperature levels in conditioned areas.
Note: This report tabulates overall statistics regarding zone temperature levels to help users in diagnosing system modeling problems. The
LEED EA Credit 1 Summary report tabulates "unmet load hour" statistics that are derived from this basic data but by a significantly different
procedure. Therefore, it is usually not possible to match data on this report with "unmet load hours" on the LEED EA Credit 1 Summary
Report. Learn more.
The report consists of a table in which each row contains data for one zone in the system. Columns in the table provide information about
maximum and minimum air temperatures in the zone, and the number of hours of operation in certain temperature ranges. The table
contains fourteen columns of data, each described below.
Occupied Operating Period
a. Max Zone Temperature - The warmest temperature occurring in the zone during hours in the occupied period.
Page 5 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
Unmet Loads Report for Air Systems
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.1 Air System Simulation Reports ››
b. Hours > 5.0 F Above Throttling Range – Number of hours during which the zone air temperature was more than 5 F (2.8 K) above the
upper limit of the cooling thermostat.
c. Hours 1.0 to 5.0 F Above Throttling Range – Number of hours during which the zone air temperature was 1.0 to 5 F (0.6 to 2.8 K) above
the upper limit of the cooling thermostat. Note that HAP uses a tolerance of 1.0 F before counting hours above the cooling throttling
range.
d. Cooling Setpoint plus Throttling Range – The upper limit for the cooling thermostat defined as the setpoint plus the throttling range.
e. Hours Within Throttling Range or Deadband – Number of hours during which the zone air temperature was between the upper cooling
limit and the lower heating limit. This is the number hours the zone temperature is in the required comfort range. Note that these hours
also include times in the 1.0 F (0.6 K) tolerance margin above the cooling limit and below the heating limit.
f. Heating Setpoint plus Throttling Range – The lower limit for the heating thermostat defined as the heating setpoint minus the throttling
range.
g. Hours 1.0 to 5.0 F Below Throttling Range – Number of hours during which the zone air temperature is 1.0 to 5 F (0.6 to 2.8 K) below
the lower limit for the heating thermostat. Note that HAP uses a tolerance of 1.0 F before counting hours below the heating throttling
range.
h. Hours > 5.0 F Below throttling Range – Number of hours during which the zone air temperature is more than 5 F (2.8 K) below the
lower limit for the heating thermostat.
i. Min Zone Temperature – The coldest temperature occurring in the zone during hours in the occupied period.
Unoccupied Operating Period
a. Max Zone Temperature – The warmest temperature occurring in the zone during hours in the unoccupied period.
b. Cooling Setpoint plus Throttling Range – The upper limit for the cooling thermostat defined as the setpoint plus the throttling range.
c. Heating Setpoint minus Throttling Range – The lower limit for the heating thermostat defined as the setpoint minus the throttling range.
d. Min Zone Temperature – The coldest temperature occurring in the zone during hours in the unoccupied period.
Special Cases. Zone temperature statistics are generally collected for all occupied hours during the year. However, there are cases or
periods of time when statistics are not collected and reported:
a. Make Up Air Unit / DOAS System - This system type does not control zone air temperature. Therefore no zone temperature statistics
are collected since the data is not relevant. Zero hours are reported for each of the zone temperature categories in this case.
b. Space Cooling Not Provided. For times when a system is not responding to zone thermostat calls for cooling, hours above the
cooling limit are not collected. This includes heating-only systems where no cooling capability exists. It also includes systems in which
space cooling is scheduled off in particular months. For a central system this happens when the central cooling coil is scheduled off.
For a terminal system such as fan coils or WSHPs, this happens when the terminal cooling coils are scheduled off.
c. Space Heating Not Provided. For times when a system is not responding to zone thermostat calls for heating, hours below the
heating limit are not collected. This includes cooling-only systems where no heating capability exists. It also includes systems in which
space heating is scheduled off in particular months. For a central system this happens when the central heating coil, terminal heating
coils and zone heating coils are either not present or are scheduled off. For a terminal system such as fan coils or WSHPs, this
happens when the terminal heating coils are scheduled off.
Troubleshooting Zone Temperature Problems. When hours occur above the upper cooling limit or below the lower heating limit for the
thermostat the first task is to evaluate the frequency and severity of the problem. For example if relatively few hours outside the thermostat
limits exist, or the amount by which the thermostat limits are exceeded is small, the problems may not be cause for concern. On the other
hand, if the number of hours outside thermostat limits is large, or the amount by which limits are exceeded is large, the problem may require
attention.
When zone temperature problems require attention, there are three common sources of error to consider:
1. System Undersized. If the system cooling or heating capacity was undersized for any reason it will usually cause zone temperatures to
fall outside the thermostat limits. This typically only happens when a mistake was made manually defining system airflows or heating coil
capacities. If sizing data was user-defined, re-examine the sizing data.
2. Simulation Loads Larger than Design Loads. Cooling and heating loads for simulation days may be larger than the peak loads for the
system design calculations. This typically happens for any of four reasons. First, the infiltration airflow rate defined for Energy Analysis
conditions is larger than the airflow rates defined for cooling and heating design conditions. Second, the internal heat gain profiles used for
simulation days are more severe than for design cooling days. Third, temperature levels for the simulation weather are hotter or colder
than those for the design conditions. Fourth, solar radiation is more intense for simulation days than for the cooling design calculations.
Check space inputs for infiltration problems. Check schedule inputs for internal heat gain problems. Compare statistics for simulation
weather and design day weather to detect problems with the weather.
3. Pulldown or Warm-up Problems. Large pulldown or warmup loads at the start of occupied periods may result in zone temperature
control problems. To determine whether this is a problem, examine cooling coil and heating coil load profiles for days following long
unoccupied periods, such as a Monday morning after a weekend. Unusually large loads at the start of occupied periods may indicate this
problem. The problem can be studied in more detail using system design reports to focus on load and temperature behavior for design
cooling days. This often will reveal the same type of behavior and problems occurring on simulation days.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Page 6 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
16.2 Plant Simulation Reports
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ››
Overview for Plant Simulation Reports Dialog
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.2 Plant Simulation Reports ››
Unmet Loads Report for Air Systems
The Unmet Loads Report provides information about the operating hours per month for equipment components and hours during which
equipment capacity was insufficient to meet the system load. This report is useful for identifying operating problems in the simulation and
when learning about hours of equipment operation.
Note: This report tabulates total unmet load conditions for all DX cooling, heat pump heating and combustion heating equipment associated
with the system. This data is intended to help diagnose equipment modeling problems. The LEED EA Credit 1 Summary report tabulates
"unmet load hour" statistics that are derived from similar data but by a significantly different procedure. Therefore, it is usually not possible to
match data on this report with "unmet load hours" on the LEED EA Credit 1 Summary Report. Learn more.
This report consists of one table for each DX cooling, heat pump heating or combustion heating component in the system. Electric resistance
heaters are assumed to have sufficient capacity to meet all heating loads and therefore do not generate unmet load statistics.
Each table contains one row for each month and a final row for annual totals. Each column in the table contains a different statistic for
equipment operation:
1. Equipment Capacity is Sufficient – Number of hours during which the equipment has sufficient capacity to meet the cooling or heating coil
load.
2. Capacity Insufficient by 0%-5% - Number of hours during which the equipment capacity is deficient by 0 to 5% versus the coil load. For
example, if the coil load is 100 MBH but the equipment capacity is only 97 MBH, it is deficient by 3%. Therefore an hour is credited to the
"0% to 5%" column in the table. Note that HAP uses a tolerance of 0.5% before counting unmet loads.
3. Capacity Insufficient by 5%-10% - Number of hours during which the equipment capacity is deficient by 5% to 10% versus the coil load.
4. Capacity Insufficient by > 10% - Number of hours during which the equipment capacity is deficient by more than 10% versus the coil load.
5. Total Hours with Unmet Loads – Sum of all hours during which capacity was insufficient.
6. Total Hours with Equipment Loads – Total operating hours for the equipment. This is the sum of hours when capacity is sufficient and
hours when unmet loads exist.
Note that for DX fan coil and WSHP systems, the statistics are summed for each fan coil or WSHP unit in the system. Therefore, if a system
has 25 fan coil units and each is deficient in capacity by 5 to 10% for a single hour, 25 hours will be added to this column, one for each fan
coil unit that is deficient. Because of this, operating hours and unmet load hours are much larger numbers for fan coil and WSHP systems
than for central systems. For example, a packaged rooftop system may show 3000 hours of DX cooling operation. A DX fan coil system with
25 zones might show 75000 hours of DX cooling operation (3000 hours x 25 fan coils).
Troubleshooting Unmet Load Problems. Unmet loads occur because the air-side operation and equipment operation are currently two
separate simulation calculations. The air-side simulations compute the coil loads without information about the hour-to-hour capacity of the
DX cooling, heat pump heating and combustion heating equipment. In the separate equipment simulation, the program calculates the
equipment capacity for the given operating conditions. If that capacity is less than the coil load, the equipment operates at its maximum
capacity, but a portion of the load is unmet. These unmet loads can occur for several common reasons.
1. The gross capacity specified for the equipment is lower than the maximum loads imposed on the equipment. Examine graphs of hourly
coil loads to identify the maximum coil load. Then compare this against the gross capacity specified for the equipment.
2. The gross capacity for auxiliary heating equipment used with air source heat pumps and water source heat pump systems may be
insufficient to meet the design heating load. Double-check the inputs for auxiliary heaters.
3. For air-cooled DX cooling equipment, maximum load may occur at a temperature warmer than the equipment design temperature.
Because cooling capacity decreases as condensing temperature rises, large loads occurring at temperatures above the design
temperature may result in insufficient capacity. Use the Simulation Weather Summary report to identify maximum summer temperatures
and then examine cooling loads at these times. Additional capacity may be needed to accommodate these operating conditions.
4. A minimum cutoff temperature prevents air-cooled DX cooling equipment from operating during hours when cooling coil loads occur.
These conditions will typically appear as hours in the "Insufficient by >10%" column in the colder months of the year. One solution is to
specify low temperature (head pressure control) operation for the DX unit. Another solution is to add an outdoor air economizer to
eliminate cooling loads at outdoor temperatures below the DX equipment cutoff temperature.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
This section explains the contents of Plant simulation reports.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Overview for Plant Simulation Reports Dialog
About Plant Simulation Reports. Plant Simulation Reports contain load and equipment performance data produced by the hour-by-hour
simulation of plant operation for one year. This information is useful for learning about plant operation and also when investigating energy
consumption patterns. HAP offers four different plant simulation reports, three of which can be generated in tabular, graphical or text file
Page 7 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
format. The latter is used for exporting data to external programs such as spreadsheets. Note that simulation reports are only available in the
full edition of HAP and not in HAP System Design Loads.
Using various menu options and toolbar buttons in HAP, there are four different ways of generating plant simulation reports. These methods
are described in the Generating Plant Simulation Reports topic. All four procedures require selection of report option on the Plant Simulation
Reports dialog shown below.
The Plant Simulation Reports Dialog is used to specify which reports should be generated and how they should be generated. The form is
divided into 3 sections:
1. The Report Selection Area in the upper portion of the dialog contains a table used to select report options. Each row in this table
contains specifications for a different report. Columns contain separate specifications for each report:
a. The Table column is used to select the tabular version of a report. Place a check mark in the box opposite the report name to select
this version of the report.
b. The Graph column is used to select the graphical version of a report. Place a check mark in the box opposite the report name to select
this version of the report. Note that you must also use the Graph Selection area of the dialog to choose the data items you wish to plot.
c. The CSV column is used to generate a simple text version of the report in Comma Separated Value (CSV) format. Data in this format
can be opened in spreadsheet programs. This is sometimes useful when you want to generate custom graphs of data or perform
further calculations with program results. Note: The CSV file generated with this option is written into the current project folder. A
message window appears before the file is generated to indicate the location of the file.
d. The Time Specifications column describes how individual reports should be generated. For the Daily Simulation Results report, users
must select a single month. For the Hourly Simulation Results report, users must select a start and end day for the report.
The contents of each plant simulation report are summarized later in this help topic.
2. The Graph Selection Area in the lower portion of the dialog contains a scrollable list used to select the data to be plotted in any graphical
reports you select. Each item in the list contains the name of the data item and its units of measure. The items found on this list are
specific to the currently selected plant and often differ from one plant to the next based on the plant type and the components the plant
uses. To select a data item, place a check mark in the box next to the item.
Example: In the figure above, if Cooling Coil Load and Plant Load are selected, then all graphical reports selected will plot these two data
items.
Graph reports may contain up to three data items chosen from the list as long as the data items use the same units of measure. For
example, Cooling Coil Load and Plant Load can both be selected for a graph because they have the same units of measure. Cooling Coil
Load and Chiller Input cannot be selected because they use different units of measure.
Readers should note that graph options are only available if a single plant was selected and simulation results already exist for the plant.
Otherwise, graph options and this graph selection area will be disabled. If you wish to graph data for a plant that has not yet been
simulated, generate tabular reports to cause simulation calculations to run. Then return to the Reports Selection dialog and request
graphical reports for the plant.
3. Command Buttons appear along the bottom of the form. Five buttons are provided:
Page 8 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
Monthly, Daily, Hourly Simulation Results for Plants
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.2 Plant Simulation Reports ››
a. Press Restore Defaults to reset selections on the dialog to a standard set of defaults. This is often done when users wish to clear
existing selections and then begin selecting reports all over again.
b. Press Print to print the tabular and graphical reports you’ve selected. Reports are printed directly without viewing them first. Note that
TXT reports will always be written to disk files and will not be printed.
c. Press Preview to view the tabular and graphical reports you’ve selected. This launches the HAP Report Viewer and displays the
reports you requested. The HAP Report Viewer provides options for the printing the reports as well as saving the reports as disk files in
Rich Text (RTF) format. Note that TXT reports will always be written to disk files and will not be displayed.
d. Press Cancel to exit from the dialog and return to the HAP main window without generating reports.
e. Press Help to display this help topic.
Report Summaries. HAP offers four different plant simulation reports. Each report is summarized below.
1. The Monthly Simulation Results report contains monthly and annual totals of loads and energy consumption for the plant. Length -
Tabular: 1 to 2 pages, Graphical: 1 page.
2. The Daily Simulation Results report contains daily totals of loads and energy consumption for one month for the plant. The month is
selected by the user in the Time Specification column of the dialog. Length - Tabular: 1 to 3 pages, Graphical: 1 page.
3. The Hourly Simulation Results report contains hourly profiles of loads and energy consumption for the plant for a series of consecutive
days selected by the user. Length - Tabular: 1 to 3 pages per day, Graphical: 1 page.
4. The Unmet Loads report provides information about the operating hours per month for the plant and hours during which equipment
capacity was insufficient to meet the plant load. This report is useful for identifying operating problems in the simulation and also for
learning about hours of equipment operation. Length – 1 to 2 pages.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Monthly, Daily, Hourly Simulation Results for Plants
This topic describes the contents of the Monthly, Daily and Hourly Simulation Results reports for plants. All three reports contain results from
the hour-by-hour energy simulation for a plants.
1. The Monthly Simulation Results report contains monthly and annual totals of loads and energy consumption for the plant. Length -
Tabular: 1 to 2 pages, Graphical: 1 page.
2. The Daily Simulation Results report contains daily totals of loads and energy consumption for one month for the plant. The month is
selected by the user in the Time Specification column of the dialog. Length - Tabular: 1 to 3 pages, Graphical: 1 page.
3. The Hourly Simulation Results report contains 24-hour profiles of loads and energy consumption for the plant for a series of consecutive
days selected by the user. Length - Tabular: 1 to 3 pages per day, Graphical: 1 page.
Three versions of each report are also offered:
1. The Table version of the report presents data in a tabular format with one column for each category of load or performance data.
2. The Graph version of the report plots profiles for up to three data items chosen by the user.
3. The CSV version of the report is a text version of the tabular report and is written to a Comma Separated Value (CSV) file. This version of
the report is used when exporting data to a spreadsheet program. Each CSV report is written into the current project folder. For easy
identification, the name of the disk file includes the type of data (Monthly, Daily, Hourly) and the name of the plant. Once the file has been
created it can be imported by a spreadsheet program.
Glossary of Data. The content of these simulation reports varies based on the plant type and the components used by the plant. A glossary
of all data column titles found on Plant Simulation Results reports is provided below. Items are arranged in functional groups similar to the
groupings of columns found on the reports. Note that any one report will contain only the subset of these items which are relevant to the
equipment used in the plant.
Chilled Water Plants (Chiller Plants or Remote Chilled Water Plants)
a. Cooling Coil Load – Total chilled water cooling coil load for air systems served by the plant.
b. Plant Cooling Load – Total cooling load for the plant. This is the sum of cooling coil load, pipe heat gain and chilled water pump heat
gain.
c. Chiller Output – Cooling provided by chillers in the plant. If Chiller Output is less than Plant Load this indicates one of two things. First, if
waterside economizer free cooling is used in the plant, it shows the reduction in mechanical cooling due to the use of free cooling.
Second, if free cooling is not used, it indicates an unmet load condition where chiller capacity is insufficient to meet the load.
d. Remote Chilled Water Load – Demand for chilled water in a Remote Chilled Water type of plant.
e. Chiller Input – Total electrical input power for electric-drive chillers in the plant. This includes compressor power and, for air-cooled
chillers, the condenser fan power. Note that electric auxiliaries for absorption chillers and engine-drive chillers are reported in a
separate item.
f. Generator Load – Total heat load for the generator in absorption chillers in the plant.
Page 9 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
g. Remote Steam Load – Demand for steam to supply steam-driven absorption and steam turbine chillers in the plant. Only applicable
when the heat source for the plant is "Remote Steam".
h. Burner Fuel Input – Energy content of fuel burned by direct-fired absorption chillers in the plant.
i. Engine Fuel Input – Energy content of fuel burned for engine-driven chillers in the plant.
j. Steam Turbine Input – Energy input for steam used by a steam turbine chiller in the plant.
k. Chiller Misc Electric – Auxiliary electric power used by absorption chillers, engine-drive chillers and steam turbine chillers in the plant.
For absorption chillers this typically represents power for the solution and refrigerant pumps. For engine and turbine chillers it
represents power for controls and ignition.
l. Boiler Input – Energy input for a boiler supply steam to absorption or steam turbine chillers in the plant.
m. Boiler Misc. Electric – Miscellaneous electric power for a combustion boiler used to supply steam to absorption or steam turbine chillers
in the plant.
n. Primary Water Dist.Pump – Input power for the primary chilled water pumps in the plant.
o. Secondary Water Dist. Pump – Input power for the secondary chilled water pumps in the plant.
p. Condenser Water Pump – Input power for condenser water pumps in the plant.
q. Heat Rejection Fan – Input power for cooling tower or dry cooler fan motors.
Hot Water Plants (Plants with Boilers and/or Heat Pumps, or Remote Hot Water Plants)
a. Heating Coil Load – Total hot water heating coil load for air systems served by the plant.
b. Plant Heating Load – Total heating load for the plant. This is the sum of heating coil load plus pipe heat loss minus hot water pump heat
gain. This column also includes service hot water loads, if the plant serves those loads.
c. Boiler Output – Heating provided by boilers in the plant. If the sum of Boiler Output, Heat Pump Output and Auxiliary Load is less than
the Plant Heating Load, this indicates and unmet load where plant capacity is insufficient to meet the load.
d. Heat Pump Output – Heating provided by heat pumps in the plant. If the sum of Boiler Output, Heat Pump Output and Auxiliary Load is
less than the Plant Heating Load, this indicates and unmet load where plant capacity is insufficient to meet the load.
e. Remote Hot Water Load – Demand for hot water in a Remote Hot Water type of plant.
f. Boiler Input – Energy input for boilers. This column includes energy for primary boilers in a hot water plant or auxiliary boilers used in a
hot water plant with heat pumps. For electric boilers this is the electric power for the boiler. For combustion boilers this is the energy
content of fuel burned. The energy or fuel source will be listed in the column heading.
g. Heat Pump Input - Electric energy input for a heat pump. This includes energy for the compressors and, for air-to-water heat pumps,
also includes the outdoor fan energy.
h. Boiler Misc. Electric – Miscellaneous electric power for a combustion boiler. Typically this represents power for a combustion blower or
a fuel oil pump.
i. Primary Water Dist. Pump – Input power for the primary hot water pumps in the plant.
j. Secondary Water Dist. Pump – Input power for the secondary hot water pumps in the plant.
k. Source Water Pump - Input power for source water pumps used for reversible water source chillers in a plant with water-to-water heat
pumps.
Steam Plants (Boilers or Remote Steam)
a. Heating Coil Load – Total steam heating coil load for air systems served by the plant.
b. Plant Heating Load – Total heating load for the plant. This is the sum of heating coil load plus pipe heat loss.
c. Boiler Output – Heating provided by boilers in the plant. If Boiler Output is less than Plant Load this indicates an unmet load condition
where boiler capacity is insufficient to meet the load.
d. Remote Steam Load – Demand for steam in a Remote Steam type of plant.
e. Boiler Input – Energy input for the boiler. For electric boilers this is the electric power for the boiler. For combustion boilers this is the
energy content of fuel burned.
f. Boiler Misc. Electric – Miscellaneous electric power for a combustion boiler. Typically this represents power for a combustion blower or a
fuel oil pump.
Changeover Plants (Reversible Chiller Heat Pumps)
a. Cooling Coil Load – Total chilled water cooling coil load for air systems served by the plant.
b. Plant Cooling Load – Total cooling load for the plant. This is the sum of cooling coil load, pipe heat gain and chilled water pump heat
gain.
c. Chiller Cooling Output – Cooling output provided by chillers in the plant. If Chiller Output is less than Plant Load this indicates one of
two things. First, if waterside economizer free cooling is used in the plant, it shows the reduction in mechanical cooling due to the use
of free cooling. Second, if free cooling is not used, it indicates an unmet load condition where chiller capacity is insufficient to meet the
load.
d. Chiller Input - Cooling Mode – Total electrical input power for chillers when operating in cooling mode. This includes compressor power
and, for air-cooled chillers, the condenser fan power.
e. Heating Coil Load – Total hot water heating coil load for air systems served by the plant.
Page 10 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
Unmet Loads Report for Plants
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.2 Plant Simulation Reports ››
f. Plant Heating Load – Total heating load for the plant. This is the sum of space heating coil load plus service hot water load (if
applicable) plus pipe heat loss minus pump heat gain.
g. Chiller Heating Output – Heating output for the chiller heat pumps in heating mode. If Heating Output is less than Plant Load this
indicates a condition where heat pump capacity is insufficient to meet the load or the heat pump has been turned off by controls to run
auxiliary heat instead. Whether this results in an unmet plant load depends on whether auxiliary heat is present and can be used to
meet the plant load.
h. Chiller Input - Heating Mode – Total electrical input power for chiller heat pumps operating in heating mode. This includes compressor
power and, for air-to-water heat pumps, the outdoor fan power.
i. Primary Water Dist.Pump – Input power for the primary supply water pumps in the plant. Includes energy for both cooling and heating
modes.
j. Secondary Water Dist. Pump – Input power for the secondary supply water pumps in the plant. Includes energy for both cooling and
heating modes.
k. Source Water Pump – Input power for the source water pumps in the plant, if reversible water source chillers are used. Includes energy
for both cooling and heating modes.
Service Hot Water (SHW) Plants (Boilers and/or Heat Pumps)
a. Service HW Load – The load on the plant due to hot water demand.
b. HW Storage Tank Losses – Heat loss from a hot water storage tank, if used.
c. SHW Circulation Losses – Heat loss in the circulation system, if specified.
d. SHW Piping Losses – Heat loss in the system piping, if specified.
e. Plant Heating Load – Load on the SHW plant. This is Service HW Load plus tank loss, circulation loss and piping loss minus service
HW distribution pump heat gain..
f. Boiler Output – Heating provided by boilers in the plant. If the sum of Boiler Output, Heat Pump Output and Auxiliary Load is less than
the Plant Heating Load, this indicates and unmet load where plant capacity is insufficient to meet the load.
g. Boiler Input – Energy input for the boiler. For electric boilers this is the electric power for the boiler. For combustion boilers this is the
energy content of fuel burned. The energy or fuel source will be listed in the column heading.
h. Heat Pump Output – Heating provided by heat pumps in the plant. If the sum of Boiler Output, Heat Pump Output and Auxiliary Load is
less than the Plant Heating Load, this indicates and unmet load where plant capacity is insufficient to meet the load.
i. Heat Pump Input - Electric energy input for a heat pump. This includes energy for the compressors and, for air-to-water heat pumps,
also includes the outdoor fan energy.
j. Boiler Misc. Electric – Miscellaneous electric power for a combustion boiler. Typically this represents power for a combustion blower or a
fuel oil pump.
k. Primary Water Dist. Pump – Input energy for the primary water pump that circulates hot water from the boilers and/or heat pumps to the
storage tank or to the SHW heat exchanger.
l. Service HW Pump – Input energy for the water pump that pressurizes the SHW system, or circulates SHW in a circulation system, if
used.
m. Pasteurization Heater – Input energy for the pasteurization heater. Applicable only if a pasteurization cycle is specified for the SHW
system.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Unmet Loads Report for Plants
The Unmet Loads Report provides information about the operating hours per month for the plant and hours during which equipment capacity
was insufficient to meet the plant load. This report is useful for identifying operating problems in the simulation and when learning about
hours of plant operation.
Note: This report tabulates total unmet load conditions for the plant. This data is intended to help diagnose plant modeling problems. The
LEED EA Credit 1 Summary report tabulates "unmet load hour" statistics that are derived from similar data but by a significantly different
procedure. Therefore, it is usually not possible to match data on this report with "unmet load hours" on the LEED EA Credit 1 Summary
Report. Learn more.
For cooling-only and heating-only plants this report consists of one table. For a changeover plant which provides both cooling and heating,
the report has two tables, one for cooling statistics and one for heating statistics. In the tables there is one row for each month and a final
row for annual totals. Each column in the table contains a different statistic for equipment operation:
1. Equipment Capacity is Sufficient – Number of hours during which the plant has sufficient capacity to meet the plant load.
2. Capacity Insufficient by 0%-5% - Number of hours during which the plant capacity is deficient by 0 to 5% versus the plant load. For
example, if the plant load is 6000 MBH but the plant capacity is only 5800 MBH, it is deficient by 3.3%. Therefore an hour is credited to the
"0% to 5%" column in the table. Note that HAP uses a tolerance of 0.5% before counting unmet loads.
Page 11 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
16.3 Building Simulation Reports
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ››
Overview for Building Simulation Reports Dialog
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
3. Capacity Insufficient by 5%-10% - Number of hours during which the plant capacity is deficient by 5% to 10% versus the plant load.
4. Capacity Insufficient by > 10% - Number of hours during which the plant capacity is deficient by more than 10% versus the plant load.
5. Total Hours with Unmet Loads – Sum of all hours during which capacity was insufficient.
6. Total Hours with Equipment Loads – Total operating hours for the plant. This is the sum of hours when capacity is sufficient and hours
when unmet loads exist.
Troubleshooting Unmet Load Problems. Unmet loads occur because air system and plant operation are determined in two separate
simulation calculations. The air system simulations compute the coil loads without information about the hour-to-hour capacity of the plant. In
the separate plant simulation, the program calculates the plant capacity for the given operating conditions. If that capacity is less than the
plant load, the plant operates at its maximum capacity, but a portion of the load is unmet.
These unmet loads generally occur when the full load capacity specified for the plant is lower than the maximum loads imposed on the
equipment. Examine graphs of hourly plant loads to identify the maximum plant load. Then compare this against the full load capacity
specified for the plant.
Note that for a changeover plant, unmet loads may occur because plant loads are not synchronized so that heating and cooling loads occur
at separate times. In addition, plants with a changeover delay values longer than 60 minutes may have a significant number of unmet load
hours due to the changeover delay.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
This section describes the contents of Building simulation reports.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Overview for Building Simulation Reports Dialog
About Building Simulation Reports. Building Simulation Reports contain energy consumption and energy cost data produced by the
building energy simulation. These reports can be used to compare energy use and energy costs for alternate designs (each represented by
a separate "building" case) or to investigate energy use patterns for an individual building case. HAP offers fourteen different building
simulation reports Note that simulation reports are only available in the full edition of HAP and not in HAP System Design Loads.
Using various menu options and toolbar buttons in HAP, there are four different ways of generating building simulation reports. These
methods are described in the Generating Building Simulation Reports topic. All four procedures require selection of report option on the
Building Simulation Reports dialog shown below.
The Building Simulation Reports Dialog is used to specify which reports should be generated and how they should be generated. The
form is divided into two tabs and also provides a panel with command buttons. These features are described below:
Page 12 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
1. The Standard Reports tab contains 13 of the 14 building simulation reports offered. The tab consists of a series of check box items used
to select individual report items. To select a report place a check in the box next to the report title. This tab is subdivided into four sections:
a. Comparative Reports contains options for two reports which allow cost and energy results for groups of buildings to be compared
side-by-side on the same report.
b. Summary Reports contain annual cost and energy use data for individual building cases.
c. Detailed Reports contain tables of monthly energy and cost data for a single building case. This section also contains a "Billing Details"
report which documents the calculation of the utility bill for each energy type or fuel source. These reports are useful when investigating
energy use patterns for a building or validating utility bill results.
d. Use Profiles contain the hour-by-hour energy use profile for a building for one energy source or fuel type. Separate reports can be
generated for each energy source or fuel type. Further, separate tabular, graphical and Comma Separated Value (CSV) file versions of
this report are offered. The latter report is used to export use profiles to a file that can be loaded into spreadsheet programs.
The contents of each building simulation report are summarized later in this help topic.
2. The LEED Report tab is used to select and configure the LEED Summary Report. This report is used when performing analysis for LEED
Energy and Atmosphere Minimum Energy Performance prerequisite or the Optimize Energy Performance credit. Based on the project
Page 13 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
preference you specified, the tab will either indicate that the LEED v4, LEED 2009, or LEED NC-2.2 version of the report will be
generated.
These LEED analyses require comparing energy use and energy costs for a Proposed building design and four variants of a Baseline
building design that complies with ASHRAE 90.1 prescriptive requirements. Typically those five buildings were selected on the HAP main
window before requesting reports. To select this report, place a check in the box opposite the report title. Then assign the buildings
selected for reporting to the Proposed and Baseline designations. Assignments are made by selecting items from the drop-down lists.
These lists only contain the buildings you selected for reporting. If the buildings use common naming with prefixes like [B000], [B090],
etc.., then HAP will automatically make the proper building designations. If custom naming is used, then you will need to make the
assignments yourself.
Note that the software allows you to generate this report with only the Proposed Building selected, only with Proposed and Baseline - 0
degree buildings selected, or all 5 buildings assigned. For example when experimenting with energy conservation measures, it may be
useful to compare Proposed and Baseline 0 degree cases on the report to determine potential for LEED credit points. Later, when the
Proposed design is finished, the complete report with Proposed and all four Baselines might be generated in preparation for submittal.
When buildings are omitted from the report, HAP adjusts the content of the report to provide useful information for the buildings that are
included.
3. Command Buttons appear along the bottom of the form. Five buttons are provided:
a. Press Restore Defaults to reset selections on the dialog to a standard set of defaults. This is often done when users wish to clear
existing selections and then begin selecting reports all over again.
b. Press Print to print the tabular and graphical reports you’ve selected. Reports are printed directly without viewing them first. Note that if
the Text File version of the Use Profiles report is selected, it will always be written to a disk file and will not be printed.
c. Press Preview to view the tabular and graphical reports you’ve selected. This launches the HAP Report Viewer and displays the
reports you requested. The HAP Report Viewer provides options for the printing the reports as well as saving the reports as disk files in
Rich Text (RTF) format. Note that if the Text File version of the Use Profiles report is selected, it will always be written to a disk file and
will not be printed.
d. Press Cancel to exit from the dialog and return to the HAP main window without generating reports.
e. Press Help to display this help topic.
Report Summaries. HAP offers thirteen different building simulation reports. Each report is summarized below.
1. The Annual Cost Summary report compares annual energy cost results for buildings. Costs are listed by system component categories
(e.g. fans, cooling, heating, etc..). Length: 1 page.
2. The Annual Energy and Emissions Summary report compares annual energy cost results for buildings with costs listed by energy or fuel
type. It also tabulates estimates of atmospheric emissions such as CO2, SO2 and NOx, if the emissions calculation option was selected in
utility rate inputs. The emissions calculation is sometimes required for green building studies. Length: 3 pages.
3. The Annual Component Costs report contains annual energy costs for a single building tabulated by system component categories such
as fans, cooling, heating, etc.. The report displays the data both in pie chart and table format. Length: 1 page.
4. The Annual Energy Costs report contains annual energy costs for a single building tabulated by energy or fuel type (e.g., electric, gas).
The report displays the data both in pie chart and table format. Length: 1 page.
5. The HVAC & Non-HVAC Cost Totals report contains annual energy cost totals for HVAC and non-HVAC uses. The report displays the
data both in pie chart and table format. Length: 1 page.
6. The Energy Budget by System Component report lists annual energy consumption itemized by system components such as fans, cooling,
heating etc... Energy data is provided in neutral units (kBTU for English, kWh for Metric) so that all categories can be compared on an
equal basis. The report tabulates both site and source energy use. This report is sometimes required for demonstrating compliance with
energy efficiency codes. Length: 1 page.
7. The Energy Budget by Energy Type report lists annual energy consumption itemized by energy and fuel type categories such as electric,
gas, fuel oil, etc... Energy data is provided in neutral units (kBTU for English, kWh for Metric) so that all categories can be compared on an
equal basis. The report tabulates both site and source energy use. This report is sometimes required for demonstrating compliance with
energy efficiency codes. Length: 1 page.
8. The Monthly Component Costs report contains month-by-month energy costs for system component categories such as fans, cooling,
heating, etc... The data is provided both in bar chart and table format. Length: 1 page.
9. The Monthly Energy Costs report lists month-by-month energy costs for separate energy and fuel types. The data is provided both in bar
chart and table format. Length: 1 page.
10. The Monthly Energy Use by System Component report provides month-by-month energy use for each system component category such
as fans, cooling, heating, etc.. Data is also itemized by energy or fuel source within each system component category. This output is
useful when investigating monthly variations in energy use for various system components. Length: 1 page.
11. The Monthly Energy Use by Energy Type report lists monthly-by-month energy use for each energy or fuel type. Length: 1 page.
12. The Billing Details report documents how the utility bill is calculated. It tabulates the month-by-month component charges for energy and
demand, monthly energy use, monthly peak demand and the time of peak demands. A separate copy of the report can be generated for
each energy or fuel source used in the building. Length: 2 pages.
13. The Use Profiles report contains hour-by-hour profiles of energy use for the building for one energy or fuel type. Separate reports can be
generated for each energy or fuel type. This report is available in tabular, graphical and Comma Separated Value (CSV) file versions. The
CSV file option generates a file containing use profile data in a format suitable for import into spreadsheet programs. Lengths: Tabular – 1
page for each 18 days; Graph – 1 page for all cases.
Page 14 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
Annual Cost Summary
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
Annual Energy and Emissions Summary
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
Annual Component Costs
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
14. The LEED v4 Optimize Energy Performance Summary is generated when the project preference for LEED rating system is set to LEED
v4. It provides energy consumption, demand and cost data in a format matching that found in the Energy Performance Calculator
spreadsheet used to document the LEED v4 Energy and Atmosphere - Optimize Energy Performance credit. This report is useful for
evaluating LEED energy performance points potential as you develop your design. When you are ready to submit to USGBC, the fact that
data matches the format of the Performance Calculator makes transfer of data into the spreadsheet efficient. Length: Typically 2 to 3
pages, but can be longer for complex projects.
15. The LEED 2009 EA Credit 1 Summary report is generated when the project preference for LEED rating system is set to LEED 2009. The
report provides energy consumption, demand and cost data in a format matching the Energy Performance Calculator spreadsheet used to
document the LEED 2009 Energy and Atmosphere Prerequisite 2 (Minimum Energy Performance) and Credit 1 (Optimize Energy
Performance). This report is useful for evaluating LEED EAp2 compliance and EAc1 points potential as you develop your design. When
you are ready to submit to USGBC, the fact that data matches the Performance Calculator format makes transfer of data into the
spreadsheet efficient. Length: Typically 2 to 3 pages, but can be longer for complex projects.
16. The LEED NC 2.2 EA Credit 1 Summary report is generated when the project preference for LEED rating system is set to LEED NC-2.2.
It provides energy consumption, demand and cost data in a format matching that found on the LEED NC-2.2 Energy and Atmosphere
Credit 1 online submittal template. This report is useful for evaluating LEED EAc1 points potential as you develop your design. When you
are ready to submit to USGBC, the fact that data matches the online submittal template format makes transfer of data into the template
efficient. Length: Typically 2 to 3 pages, but can be longer for complex projects.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Annual Cost Summary
The Annual Cost Summary report compares annual energy cost results for building.
This report contains three tables. In each, a separate column contains data for a different building design case so cost data can be
compared side by side. Building cases are listed in alphabetical order from left to right. Each row in the table contains energy cost data for a
separate system component such as fans, cooling, heating, etc. The report contains three tables:
1. Annual Costs lists the annual energy cost for each system component. For a description of equipment included in each system
component category, please refer to the Annual Component Costs topic.
2. Annual Cost per Unit Floor Area provides cost data in terms of cost per sqft or per sqm of gross floor area. Gross floor area is the sum
of floor areas for conditioned areas (spaces served by air systems in the building) and non-conditioned floor area defined by the user.
3. Component Cost as a Percentage of Total Cost lists each component cost as a percentage of the total building energy cost.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Annual Energy and Emissions Summary
The Annual Energy and Emissions Summary report compares annual energy cost results for buildings. It also tabulates an estimate of
atmospheric CO2 equivalent (CO2e) emissions, if the emissions calculation option was selected in utility rate inputs.
The report contains four tables. In each, a separate column contains data for a different building design case so cost data can be compared
side-by-side. Building cases are listed alphabetically from left to right. Each row in the table contains cost data for a different HVAC or non-
HVAC energy or fuel category. The report contains five tables:
1. Annual Costs lists the annual energy cost for each energy or fuel type for HVAC and non-HVAC uses.
2. Annual Energy Consumption contains the annual energy use for each energy or fuel type. Values are tabulated separately for HVAC
components, non-HVAC components and grand total energy use.
3. Annual Emissions provides estimates of annual CO2 equivalent (CO2e) emissions resulting from the use of electricity or fossil fuels by
the building. This table will only contain data if the Emissions Analysis option was selected in utility rates defined for the building. If the
Emissions Analysis option was not selected, the table will contain zero values.
4. Annual Cost per Unit Floor Area lists the annual energy cost per sqft or sqm of gross floor area for each energy or fuel type. The gross
floor area is the sum of floor area for conditioned spaces served by air systems in the building and additional unconditioned floor area
specified by the user.
5. Component Cost as a Percentage of Total Cost lists each component cost as a percentage of the total building energy cost.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Page 15 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
Annual Energy Costs
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
HVAC and Non-HVAC Cost Totals
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
Annual Component Costs
The Annual Component Costs report contains energy costs for a single building listed by system component categories such as fans,
cooling, heating, etc.. The report provides annual cost data in the form of a pie chart and a table.
1. The Pie Chart shows each component cost as a percentage of the total building energy cost and a table.
2. The Table contains one row for each component cost category and separate columns for the annual cost, cost per sqft or sqm of gross
building floor area, and cost as a percent of the total cost.
Further Information about System Component Costs. In this and other building simulation reports that show cost and energy data listed
by system components, the following rules are used to classify energy use into the system component categories:
1. Air System Fans – Energy use for the following components are included in this category:
a. Supply, return, ventilation, exhaust and terminal fans.
b. Ventilation reclaim devices such as heat wheels or pump around systems.
2. Cooling - Energy uses included in this category are:
a. Electric energy use by packaged and split DX cooling equipment.
b. Electric energy use by packaged and split heat pumps (only for cooling duty).
c. Electric energy use for chillers and chiller heat pumps running in cooling mode.
d. Remote steam input for absorption chillers and turbine chillers.
e. Boiler energy use for steam boilers serving absorption chillers and turbine chillers.
f. Fuel use for direct-fired absorption chillers and engine chillers.
g. Use of remote chilled water.
3. Heating - Energy uses included in this category are:
a. Electric energy use by electric resistance heating coils.
b. Fuel use by combustion heating units.
c. Electric energy and fuel use by hot water and steam boilers for space heating, humidification and SHW duty.
d. Electric energy for air-to-water and water-to-water heat pumps running in heating mode for space heating and SHW duty.
e. Electric energy use by packaged and split heat pumps (only for heating duty).
f. Electric energy use for electric auxiliary heaters used with heat pumps.
g. Fuel use by combustion auxiliary heaters used with heat pumps.
h. Use of remote hot water.
i. Use of remote steam.
4. Heat Rejection Fans – Energy use by fan motors in cooling towers and dry coolers.
5. Pumps – Energy use for chilled water, hot water and WSHP circulation pumps.
6. Lights – Energy use for overhead and task lighting in conditioned areas.
7. Electric Equipment – Energy use for electric equipment defined in space inputs. This represents electric equipment in the space which
contributes heat gain to the space loads.
8. Miscellaneous Electric – Energy use for lighting and electric equipment defined on the Miscellaneous Energy tab in building inputs. This
represents electric equipment outside the conditioned space such as exterior lighting.
9. Miscellaneous Fuel Use – Fuel use defined on the Miscellaneous Energy tab in building inputs.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Annual Energy Costs
The Annual Energy Costs report contains annual energy costs for a single building tabulated according to energy and fuel types. The report
provides annual cost data in the form of a pie chart and a table.
1. The Pie Chart shows each component cost as a percentage of the total building energy cost and a table.
2. The Table contains one row for each energy category and separate columns for the annual cost, cost per sqft or sqm of gross building
floor area, and cost as a percent of the total cost.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
HVAC and Non-HVAC Cost Totals
The HVAC & Non-HVAC Cost Totals report contains annual energy cost totals for HVAC and non-HVAC uses for a single building. The
report provides annual cost data in the form of a pie chart and a table.
1. The Pie Chart shows each component cost as a percentage of the total building energy cost and a table.
Page 16 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
Energy Budget by System Component
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
Energy Budget by Energy Type
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
Monthly Component Costs
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
Monthly Energy Costs
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
2. The Table contains one row for each component cost category and separate columns for the annual cost, cost per sqft or sqm of gross
building floor area, and cost as a percent of the total cost.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Energy Budget by System Component
The Energy Budget by System Component report lists annual energy consumption itemized by system components such as fans, cooling,
heating etc... Energy data is provided in neutral units (kBTU for English, kWh for Metric) so that all categories can be compared on an equal
basis. The report tabulates both site and source energy use. This report is sometimes required for demonstrating compliance with energy
efficiency codes.
The report consists of two tables:
1. Annual Coil Loads lists the total annual cooling and heating coil loads for the building. The heating category includes data for both space
heating and humidification.
2. Energy Consumption by System Component lists energy use for each system component category. Each row in the table contains
energy use for a separate system component. Columns contain site and source energy use and energy use per sqft or sqm of gross floor
area. Site energy is the energy consumed in the building. Source energy is an estimate of the energy consumed at an electrical power
plant in order to provide the necessary power to the building. The conversion from site to source energy for electricity is based on the
"average electrical generating efficiency" defined by the user in building inputs. For fuel sources site and source energy are equal.
Finally, rules for placing equipment energy use in the nine system component categories is documented in the Annual Component Costs
topic.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Energy Budget by Energy Type
The Energy Budget by Energy Type report lists annual energy consumption itemized by energy and fuel type. Energy data is provided in
neutral units (kBTU for English, kWh for Metric) so that all categories can be compared on an equal basis. The report tabulates both site and
source energy use. This report is sometimes required for demonstrating compliance with energy efficiency codes.
The report consists of two tables:
1. Annual Coil Loads lists the total annual cooling and heating coil loads for the building. The heating category includes data for both space
heating and humidification.
2. Energy Consumption by Energy Source lists energy use for each energy or fuel type. Each row in the table contains energy use for a
separate energy or fuel type. Columns contain site and source energy use and energy use per sqft or sqm of gross floor area. Site energy
is the energy consumed in the building. Source energy is an estimate of the energy consumed at an electrical power plant in order to
provide the necessary power to the building. The conversion from site to source energy for electricity is based on the "average electrical
generating efficiency" defined by the user in building inputs. For fuel sources site and source energy are equal.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Monthly Component Costs
The Monthly Component Costs report contains month-by-month energy costs for separate system component categories such as fans,
cooling, heating, etc... The data is provided both in bar chart and table format. Rules for assigning equipment energy use to the various
system component categories are discussed in the Annual Component Costs topic.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Monthly Energy Costs
The Monthly Energy Costs report lists month-by-month energy costs for separate energy and fuel types. The data is provided both in bar
chart and table format.
Page 17 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
Monthly Energy Use by System Component
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
Monthly Energy Use by Energy Type
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
Billing Details
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
Use Profiles
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Monthly Energy Use by System Component
The Monthly Energy Use by System Component report provides month-by-month energy use for each system component category such as
fans, cooling, heating, etc.. Data is also itemized by energy or fuel source within each system component category. This output is useful
when investigating monthly variations in energy use for various system components.
The report consists of one table in which each row contains data for a different system component and each column contains data for a
different month. For certain system component categories such as cooling, heating and miscellaneous fuel use, consumption in multiple
energy and fuel categories is possible. Therefore, in these cases separate line items are provided for each energy or fuel source.
For an explanation of rules used to assigned equipment energy use to the various system component categories, please refer to the Annual
Component Costs topic.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Monthly Energy Use by Energy Type
The Monthly Energy Use by Energy Type report lists monthly-by-month energy use for each energy or fuel type. Energy profiles are
tabulated separately for HVAC and non-HVAC energy uses.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Billing Details
The Billing Details report documents how the utility bill is calculated. It tabulates the month-by-month component charges for energy and
demand, monthly energy use, monthly peak demand and the time of peak demands. A separate copy of the report can be generated for
each energy or fuel source used in the building.
This report consists of six tables
1. Component Charges lists the energy, demand, customer, tax and total utility charges for each month and for the year.
2. Totals lists the total utility charge, total energy consumption and the average price for energy or fuel. The average price is calculated as
total charge divided by total energy consumption. This average price is used when calculating energy costs on a system component basis.
3. Consumption Totals lists the energy consumption for the month and for each time-of-day billing period (if applicable).
4. Billing Demands lists the billing demand for the month and for time-of-day periods (if applicable). The "billing demand" is the value used
to calculate demand charges. To derive billing demand, the maximum demands from the next table are adjusted for any demand
determination clauses such as rachet or trailing window clauses.
5. Maximum Demands lists the actual peak demand for the month and for each time-of-day period (if applicable).
6. Time of Maximum Demands lists the month, day and hour for the maximum demands shown in the previous table.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Use Profiles
The Use Profiles report contains hour-by-hour profiles of energy use for a building for one energy or fuel type. Separate reports can be
generated for each energy and fuel type. The report can also span any range of days specified by the user. Three versions of this report are
offered:
1. The Table version consists tables showing the 24-hour energy use profile for a series of days. In these tables, each column contains the
24-hour profile for one day. Each row contains data for one hour.
2. The Graph version contains a line graph plotting the hour-by-hour energy use profile for the range of days requested.
3. The CSV version of the report is a text version of the tabular report and is written to a Comma Separated Value (CSV) file. This version of
the report is used when exporting data to a spreadsheet program. Each CSV report is written into the current project folder. For easy
Page 18 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
LEED NC 2.2 EA Credit 1 Summary
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
identification, the name of the disk file includes the type of data (Hourly) and the name of the building. Once the file has been created it
can be imported by a spreadsheet program.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
LEED NC 2.2 EA Credit 1 Summary
The LEED NC 2.2 EA Credit 1 Summary report provides energy use, demand and cost data required for the LEED NC 2.2 Energy and
Atmosphere Credit 1 on-line submittal template. This report combines data from the Proposed, Baseline 0 deg, Baseline 90 deg, Baseline
180 deg and Baseline 270 deg buildings in a project to provide data found in sections 1.1, 1.3, 1.5, 1.8.1, 1.8.1b, 1.8.2, and 1.8.2b of the
submittal template. Data is provided in a format similar to that used in the on-line template to make it easy to transfer data from the report
into the on-line template. The report provides additional data such as an energy savings vs EA Credit 1 points table to help you easily identify
credit points earned from the analysis.
The report consists of 12 sections:
1. General Information provides the name and version of the simulation program and the name of the simulation weather file. This is a
subset of information found in section 1.1 (General Information) in the on-line submittal template.
2. Building Designations lists the names of the buildings from the HAP project assigned to the Proposed, Baseline 0 deg, Baseline 90 deg,
Baseline 180 deg and Baseline 270 deg roles in the report. This information helps you to refer back to the HAP project to generate more
detailed reports when investigating the source of data shown on this report.
3. Floor Areas lists the conditioned floor area and total floor area for the Proposed and Baseline 0 deg buildings. This is reference
information that is sometimes useful in evaluating results. The LEED analysis requires that conditioned floor area and total floor area for
the Baseline building must match the corresponding areas for the Proposed building.
4. Above-Grade Wall & Vertical Glazing Area by Orientation documents the wall and glazing areas for the Baseline 0 degree and
Proposed buildings. This is reference information that must be submitted on the LEED online templates. Each row in the table contains
data for one of the 16 principal orientations for vertical walls. The last row provides totals for the whole building. From left to right the
table is divided into two sections - one for Baseline 0 degree building data and one for Proposed building data. Each section contains 3
columns:
a. Above-Grade Gross Wall Area lists the gross area of above grade walls for each principal orientation. Note that LEED
documentation rules require that any roof surface with slope of 60 degrees or larger must be included in this total area.
b. Vertical Glazing Area lists the total glazing area for windows located on this orientation of the building. If any roof surface area with
slope of 60 degrees or larger was included in this table, then skylights on those roof surfaces are included in this vertical glazing area.
c. WWR (%) is the overall window to wall ratio for this orientation.
5. Roof & Skylight Areas documents the roof and skylight areas for the Baseline 0 degree and Proposed buildings. This is reference
information that must be submitted on the LEED online templates. The table contains one row with data for the entire building. From left
to right the table is divided into two sections - one for Baseline 0 degree building data and one for Proposed building data. Each section
contains 3 columns:
a. Roof Area lists the total gross area of roof surfaces for the building. Note that LEED documentation rules require that any roof surface
with slope of 60 degrees or larger must be included in the "above grade wall" table rather than in this table.
b. Skylight Area lists the total glazing area for skylights. If the building has roof surfaces that have slope of 60 degrees or larger, then
any skylights on those surfaces are included in the "Vertical Glazing Area" column of the Above Grade Wall table and are omitted from
this area value.
c. (%) lists the overall skylight to roof ratio for the building..
6. Advisory Messages lists the cooling and heating unmet load hours for the Proposed and Baseline 0 deg buildings as well as Proposed
vs Baseline difference in unmet load hours. This information is a subset of the data found in Table 1.3 in the on-line submittal template.
For information about the derivation of LEED unmet load hours, click here: Read more.
7. Table 1.5 Energy Type Summary summarizes information about energy and fuel sources used in the building. It imitates the format of
Table 1.5 in the on-line submittal template. In this table each row contains data for one energy or fuel source. Columns list the energy or
fuel type, the corresponding utility rate name and the units of measure for energy and demand.
8. Table 1.8.1 Baseline Performance - Performance Rating Method Compliance contains energy consumption and peak demand
information for the four Baseline Buildings in the analysis. This table imitates the format of Table 1.8.1 in the on-line submittal template. In
this table each row contains data for one End Use. Columns contain the end use name, the process designation, the energy type, energy
and demand units, and the energy use and peak demand for the four Baseline Buildings as well as the average of the Baselines.
End Use items are arranged in the following sequence:
Interior Lighting
Space Heating (if multiple energy or fuel sources are used, multiple End Uses will be listed)
Space Cooling (if multiple energy or fuel sources are used, multiple End Uses will be listed)
Pumps
Heat Rejection (this item contains energy for cooling tower fans)
Fans - Interior
Receptacle Equipment
Service Water Heating
Page 19 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
(see discussion section at the end of this topic for description of contents of each of the above standard end use items)
Following these standard items are any end use items specified on the Misc. Energy Use tab of the Building Properties window. Items will
appear in the order they are defined in HAP. Typically these items will involve such end uses as exterior lighting, elevators and escalators
and service water heating.
A footnote to this table lists process cost as a percentage of the average Baseline Building energy cost.
9. Table 1.8.1b Baseline Energy Costs contains energy cost information for the four Baseline Buildings and the Baseline average. This
table imitates the format of Table 1.8.1(b) in the on-line submittal template. In this table each row contains data for one energy or fuel
source. Columns contain the energy type name, the energy cost for the four Baseline Buildings and the Baseline average.
10. Table 1.8.2 Performance Rating Table - Performance Rating Method Compliance compares energy consumption and peak demand
results of the Proposed Building versus the Baseline average. This table imitates the format of Table 1.8.2 in the on-line submittal
template. In this table each row contains data for one End Use energy item. The order of rows is exactly the same as used in Table 1.8.1.
Columns in the table list the end use name, the process designation, the energy type, energy and demand units, the Proposed Building
results, the Baseline average results and the savings of Proposed versus Baseline. Percentage savings is calculated per LEED and
ASHRAE 90.1 Appendix G guidelines.
11. Table 1.8.2b Energy Cost and Consumption by Energy Type - Performance Rating Method Compliance contains the final energy
use and energy cost comparison between the Proposed Building and the Baseline Average. This table imitates the format of Table 1.8.2
(b) in the on-line submittal template.
In the upper part of the table, each row contains data for one energy or fuel source used in the building. Columns contain the energy type
name, the Proposed Design energy use and energy cost, the Baseline average energy use and energy cost, and the percent savings for
energy use and energy cost. Percent savings are calculated per LEED and ASHRAE 90.1 Appendix G guidelines.
The lower part of the table is formatted to match the table in the on-line submittal template, but is left blank since this data for on-site
renewables and exceptional calculation results is out of scope for the HAP analysis. This material is provided in case on-site renewables
or exceptional calculations will be added. This data can be entered by editing the report in a word processor to derive overall cost savings
results.
12. LEED NC 2.2 EA Credit 1 Points Reference Table lists % cost savings versus LEED NC 2.2 EA Credit 1 point levels. % cost savings
are provided both for new construction and existing building renovation scenarios. The points earned for both scenarios are highlighted.
This table is provided so you can quickly assess EA Credit 1 points earned based on the energy cost savings shown in Table 1.8.2b.
Discussion
Individual building and HVAC energy uses are assigned to the seven standard End Use items in tables 1.8.1 and 1.8.2 as follows:
1. Interior Lighting:
a. Overhead lights
b. Task lights
2. Space Heating
(Separate End Use line items are provided for electric and each fuel use category)
a. Electric energy for all electric heating coils, including heat pump auxiliary heaters.
b. Electric energy for all HW and steam electric boilers that are related to space heating duty. If a heating plant serves both space and
service hot water (SHW) loads, then all heating energy is reported here since it is not possible to identify how much energy is required
for space heating separately from the energy required to serve SHW loads.
c. Electric energy for self-contained humidifiers
d. Electric energy for compressor heating duty in air source heat pumps and water source heat pumps.
e. "Misc Electric Use" defined for combustion heaters and combustion boilers related to space heating duty.
f. Fuel use by all combustion heaters including heat pump auxiliary heaters.
g. Fuel use by all HW and steam combustion boilers that are related to space heating duty. If a heating plant serves both space and
service hot water (SHW) loads, then all heating energy is reported here since it is not possible to identify how much energy is required
for space heating separately from the energy required to serve SHW loads.
h. Fuel use by self-contained humidifiers.
i. Remote hot water and remote steam use related to space heating equipment.
3. Space Cooling
(Separate End Use line items are provided for electric and each fuel use category)
a. Electric energy for compressors in DX cooling equipment (rooftops, splits, VPACs, DX FCUs)
b. Electric energy for compressor cooling duty in air source heat pumps and water source heat pumps.
c. Electric energy for electric chillers.
d. Fuel use by fuel-driven chillers and direct-fired absorption chillers.
e. Remote steam and remote HW use by absorption and steam-driven chillers.
f. Fuel use by HW and steam boilers serving absorption chillers.
g. "Misc Electric Use" defined for absorption and fuel driven chillers.
h. Remote chilled water energy use.
4. Pumps
a. Electric energy for all water pumps found in chilled water, hot water, condenser water and WSHP circulation loops.
5. Heat Rejection
a. Cooling tower fan energy.
6. Fans - Interior
a. Electric energy for supply, return, terminal, zone heating unit, ventilation and exhaust fans.
b. Electric energy for ventilation reclaim devices.
7. Receptacle Equipment
a. Electric energy use defined via the "Electric Equipment" input item in space inputs.
Page 20 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
LEED 2009 EA Credit 1 Summary
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
8. Service Water Heating
(Separate End Use line items are provided for electric and each fuel use category)
a. Electric energy for electric boilers or heat pumps supplying heat in a standalone SHW system.
b. Fuel use for combustion boilers supplying heat in a standalone SHW system.
Note: If a plant serves both space heating and SHW loads, then energy use by the boilers or heat pumps is categorized under Space
Heating since it is not possible to identify how much input energy is required for space heating separately from energy required for SHW
loads.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
LEED 2009 EA Credit 1 Summary
The LEED 2009 EA Credit 1 Summary report provides energy use, demand and cost data required for the LEED 2009 Energy and
Atmosphere (EA) Prerequisite 2 (Minimum Energy Performance) and Credit 1 (Optimize Energy Performance).
This report combines data from the Proposed, Baseline 0 deg, Baseline 90 deg, Baseline 180 deg and Baseline 270 deg buildings in a
project. Data is provided in a format similar to that used in the LEED Energy Performance Calculator spreadsheet to make it easy to transfer
data from the report into the spreadsheet. The report provides additional data such as an energy savings vs EA Credit 1 points table to help
you easily identify credit points earned from the analysis.
The report consists of 12 sections:
1. General provides the name and version of the simulation program and the name of the simulation weather file. This is a subset of
information found on the General Information tab in the Performance Calculator.
2. Building Designations lists the names of the buildings from the HAP project assigned to the Proposed, Baseline 0 deg, Baseline 90 deg,
Baseline 180 deg and Baseline 270 deg roles in the report. This information helps you to refer back to the HAP project to generate more
detailed reports when investigating the source of data shown on this report.
3. Space Summary lists the conditioned floor area and total floor area for the Proposed and Baseline 0 deg buildings. These items are also
placed in the General Information tab of the Performance Calculator. This information is also sometimes useful in evaluating results. The
LEED analysis requires that conditioned floor area and total floor area for the Baseline building must match the corresponding areas for
the Proposed building.
4. Above-Grade Wall & Vertical Glazing Area by Orientation documents the wall and glazing areas for the Baseline 0 degree and
Proposed buildings. This information is placed on the Shading and Fenestration tab in the LEED Performance Calculator.
Each row in the table contains data for one of the 16 principal orientations for vertical walls. The last row provides totals for the whole
building. From left to right the table is divided into two sections - one for Baseline 0 degree building data and one for Proposed building
data. Each section contains 3 columns:
a. Above-Grade Gross Wall Area lists the gross area of above grade walls for each principal orientation. Note that LEED documentation
rules require that any roof surface with slope of 60 degrees or larger must be included in this total area.
b. Vertical Glazing Area lists the total glazing area for windows located on this orientation of the building. If any roof surface area with
slope of 60 degrees or larger was included in this table, then skylights on those roof surfaces are included in this vertical glazing area.
c. WWR (%) is the overall window to wall ratio for this orientation.
5. Roof & Skylight Areas documents the roof and skylight areas for the Baseline 0 degree and Proposed buildings. This information is
placed on the Shading and Fenstration tab of the LEED Performance Calculator.
The table contains one row with data for the entire building. From left to right the table is divided into two sections - one for Baseline 0
degree building data and one for Proposed building data. Each section contains 3 columns:
a. Roof Area lists the total gross area of roof surfaces for the building. Note that LEED documentation rules require that any roof surface
with slope of 60 degrees or larger must be included in the "above grade wall" table rather than in this table.
b. Skylight Area lists the total glazing area for skylights. If the building has roof surfaces that have slope of 60 degrees or larger, then
any skylights on those surfaces are included in the "Vertical Glazing Area" column of the Above Grade Wall table and are omitted from
this area value.
c. (%) lists the overall skylight to roof ratio for the building..
6. Energy Sources summarizes information about energy and fuel sources used in the building. It imitates the format of a table on the
"Performance Outputs 1" tab in the LEED Performance Calculator spreadsheet.. In this table each row contains data for one energy or
fuel source. Columns list the energy or fuel type, the corresponding utility rate name and the units of measure for energy and demand.
7. Baseline Energy Summary by End Use contains energy consumption and peak demand information for the four Baseline Buildings in
the analysis found on the "Performance Outputs 1" tab of the Performance Calculator spreadsheet. In this table each row contains data
for one End Use. Columns contain the end use name, whether the end use is unregulated, the energy type, energy and demand units,
and the energy use and peak demand for the four Baseline Buildings as well as the average of the four Baselines.
End Use items are arranged in the following sequence:
Interior Lighting
Space Heating (if multiple energy or fuel sources are used, multiple End Uses will be listed)
Space Cooling (if multiple energy or fuel sources are used, multiple End Uses will be listed)
Pumps
Page 21 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
Heat Rejection (this item contains energy for cooling tower fans)
Fans - Interior
Receptacle Equipment
Service Water Heating
(see discussion section at the end of this topic for description of contents of each of the above standard end use items)
Following these standard items are any end use items specified from the Misc. Energy Use tab of the Building Properties window. Items
will appear in the order they are defined in HAP. Typically these items will involve such end uses as exterior lighting, and elevators and
escalators..
8. Baseline Building Annual Energy Cost by Energy Type contains energy cost information for the four Baseline Buildings and the
Baseline average found on the "Performance Outputs 1" tab of the Performance Calculator spreadsheet. In this table each row contains
data for one energy or fuel source. Columns contain the energy type name, the energy cost for the four Baseline Buildings and the
Baseline average.
9. Performance Rating Table - Performance Rating Method Compliance contains energy consumption and peak demand results of the
Proposed Building versus the Baseline average found on the "Performance Outputs 1" tab of the Performance Calculator spreadsheet. In
this table each row contains data for one End Use energy item. The order of rows is exactly the same as used in the "Baseline Energy
Summary by End Use" table above. Columns in the table list:
a. End Use Name.
b. Unregulated - Whether the end use is unregulated.
c. Energy Type for the end use.
d. Energy Consumption and Demand Units for the end use..
e. Baseline - The average of the four Baseline Building energy consumption and demand for the end use.
f. Proposed - The Proposed Building energy consumption and demand results for the end use..
g. Energy / Demand Savings - The energy consumption savings or demand savings of Proposed versus Baseline. This is calculated as
100 x (Baseline - Proposed) / Baseline.
h. End Use Percent Contribution to Total Energy Savings - This is the percent of total energy consumption savings represented by each
end use category.
i. End Use Percent Contribution to Total Cost Savings - This is the percent of total energy cost savings represented by each end use
category.
j. Percent of Total Proposed Site Energy Consumption - This is the percent of total Proposed Building energy consumption represented by
each end use category.
10. Performance Rating Energy Consumption and Cost by Fuel Type - Performance Rating Method Compliance contains the final
energy use and energy cost comparison between the Proposed Building and the Baseline average found on the "Performance Outputs 1"
tab of the Performance Calculator spreadsheet.
Rows in the table list the energy types used in the buildings, and the corresponding energy use and energy cost. A final row lists the total
building energy use in neutral units (kBTU for English units, and kWh for Metric units) plus the total energy cost. In columns from left to
right:
a. The first group of columns lists the energy use and energy cost for the average of the four Baseline Buildings.
b. The second group of columns lists energy use and energy cost for the Proposed Building.
c. A final group lists the percent savings of Proposed versus Baseline. The percent cost savings listed in the totals row is the basis for
determining LEED energy performance points earned.
11. Unmet Loads lists the number of unmet load hours for cooling and heating for the Baseline 0 Degree and Proposed Buildings, and the
difference between the two. The cell in the bottom row of the table indicates compliance with the ASHRAE 90.1 Appendix G requirement
that neither Baseline nor Proposed Building total unmet hours can exceed 300.
12. LEED 2009 EA Credit 1 Points Reference Table lists % cost savings versus LEED 2009 EA Credit 1 point levels. % cost savings
scales are provided for new construction, existing building renovation, and core and shell scenarios. Corresponding points are shown for
all applicable LEED 2009 rating systems. The % cost savings achieved is highlighted for each of the scenarios so a user can easily read
across to the applicable rating system to determine points earned..
Discussion
Individual building and HVAC energy uses are assigned to the seven standard End Use items in the Baseline Performance and Performance
Rating tables as follows:
1. Interior Lighting:
a. Overhead lights
b. Task lights
2. Space Heating
(Separate End Use line items are provided for electric and each fuel use category)
a. Electric energy for all electric heating coils, including heat pump auxiliary heaters.
b. Electric energy for all hot water and steam electric boilers that are related to space heating duty. If a heating plant serves both space
and service hot water (SHW) loads, then all heating energy is reported here since it is not possible to identify how much energy is
required for space heating separately from the energy required to serve SHW loads.
c. Electric energy for self-contained humidifiers
d. Electric energy for compressor heating duty in air source heat pumps and water source heat pumps.
e. "Misc Electric Use" defined for combustion heaters and combustion boilers related to space heating duty.
f. Fuel use by all combustion space heaters including heat pump auxiliary heaters.
g. Fuel use by all hot water and steam combustion boilers that are related to space heating duty. If a heating plant serves both space and
service hot water (SHW) loads, then all heating energy is reported here since it is not possible to identify how much energy is required
for space heating separately from the energy required to serve SHW loads.
Page 22 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
LEED v4 Optimize Energy Performance Summary
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
h. Fuel use by self-contained humidifiers.
i. Remote hot water and remote steam use related to space heating equipment.
3. Space Cooling
(Separate End Use line items are provided for electric and each fuel use category)
a. Electric energy for compressors in DX cooling equipment (rooftops, splits, VPACs, DX FCUs)
b. Electric energy for compressor cooling duty in air source heat pumps and water source heat pumps.
c. Electric energy for electric chillers.
d. Fuel use by fuel-driven chillers and direct-fired absorption chillers.
e. Remote steam and remote HW use by absorption and steam-driven chillers.
f. Fuel use by HW and steam boilers serving absorption chillers.
g. "Misc Electric Use" defined for absorption and fuel driven chillers.
h. Remote chilled water energy use.
4. Pumps
a. Electric energy for all water pumps found in chilled water, hot water, condenser water, WSHP, and service hot water circulation loops.
5. Heat Rejection
a. Fan energy for cooling towers and dry coolers..
6. Fans - Interior
a. Electric energy for supply, return, terminal, zone heating unit, ventilation and exhaust fans.
b. Electric energy for ventilation reclaim devices such as heat recovery wheels, energy recovery wheels, and pump around systems..
7. Receptacle Equipment
a. Electric energy use defined via the "Electric Equipment" input item in space inputs.
8. Service Water Heating
(Separate End Use line items are provided for electric and each fuel use category)
a. Electric energy for electric boilers or heat pumps supplying heat in a standalone SHW system.
b. Fuel use for combustion boilers supplying heat in a standalone SHW system.
Note: If a plant serves both space heating and SHW loads, then energy use by the boilers or heat pumps is categorized under Space
Heating since it is not possible to identify how much input energy is required for space heating separately from energy required for SHW
loads.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
LEED v4 Optimize Energy Performance Summary
The LEED v4 Credit Optimize Energy Performance Summary report provides energy use, demand and cost data required for the LEED
v4 Energy and Atmosphere Minimum Energy Performance Calculator. In LEED v4 this is where energy simulation results are tabulated for
both the Minimum Energy Performance Prerequisite and the Optimize Energy Performance Credit.
This report combines data from the Proposed, Baseline 0 deg, Baseline 90 deg, Baseline 180 deg and Baseline 270 deg buildings in a
project. Data is provided in a format similar to that used in the Performance Calculator to make it easy to transfer data from the report into
the Calculator. The report provides additional data such as an energy savings vs Optimize Energy Performance Credit points table to help
you easily identify credit points earned from the analysis.
The report consists of 12 sections:
1. General provides the name and version of the simulation program and the name of the simulation weather file. This is a subset of
information found on the General Information tab in the Performance Calculator.
2. Building Designations lists the names of the buildings from the HAP project assigned to the Proposed, Baseline 0 deg, Baseline 90 deg,
Baseline 180 deg and Baseline 270 deg roles in the report. This information helps you to refer back to the HAP project to generate more
detailed reports when investigating the source of data shown on this report.
3. Space Summary lists the conditioned floor area and total floor area for the Proposed and Baseline 0 deg buildings. These items are also
placed in the General Information tab of the Performance Calculator. This information is also sometimes useful in evaluating results. The
LEED analysis requires that conditioned floor area and total floor area for the Baseline building must match the corresponding areas for
the Proposed building.
4. Above-Grade Wall & Vertical Glazing Area by Orientation documents the wall and glazing areas for the Baseline 0 degree and
Proposed buildings. This information is placed on the Shading and Fenestration tab in the LEED Performance Calculator.
Each row in the table contains data for one of the 16 principal orientations for vertical walls. The last row provides totals for the whole
building. From left to right the table is divided into two sections - one for Baseline 0 degree building data and one for Proposed building
data. Each section contains 3 columns:
a. Above-Grade Gross Wall Area lists the gross area of above grade walls for each principal orientation. Note that LEED documentation
rules require that any roof surface with slope of 60 degrees or larger must be included in this total area.
b. Vertical Glazing Area lists the total glazing area for windows located on this orientation of the building. If any roof surface area with
slope of 60 degrees or larger was included in this table, then skylights on those roof surfaces are included in this vertical glazing area.
Page 23 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
c. WWR (%) is the overall window to wall ratio for this orientation.
5. Roof & Skylight Areas documents the roof and skylight areas for the Baseline 0 degree and Proposed buildings. This information is
placed on the Shading and Fenstration tab of the LEED Performance Calculator.
The table contains one row with data for the entire building. From left to right the table is divided into two sections - one for Baseline 0
degree building data and one for Proposed building data. Each section contains 3 columns:
a. Roof Area lists the total gross area of roof surfaces for the building. Note that LEED documentation rules require that any roof surface
with slope of 60 degrees or larger must be included in the "above grade wall" table rather than in this table.
b. Skylight Area lists the total glazing area for skylights. If the building has roof surfaces that have slope of 60 degrees or larger, then
any skylights on those surfaces are included in the "Vertical Glazing Area" column of the Above Grade Wall table and are omitted from
this area value.
c. (%) lists the overall skylight to roof ratio for the building..
6. Energy Sources summarizes information about energy and fuel sources used in the building. It imitates the format of a table on the
"Performance Outputs 1" tab in the LEED Performance Calculator spreadsheet.. In this table each row contains data for one energy or
fuel source. Columns list the energy or fuel type, the corresponding utility rate name and the units of measure for energy and demand.
7. Baseline Energy Summary by End Use contains energy consumption and peak demand information for the four Baseline Buildings in
the analysis found on the "Performance Outputs 1" tab of the Performance Calculator spreadsheet. In this table each row contains data
for one End Use. Columns contain the end use name, whether the end use is unregulated, the energy type, energy and demand units,
and the energy use and peak demand for the four Baseline Buildings as well as the average of the four Baselines.
End Use items are arranged in the following sequence:
Interior Lighting
Space Heating (if multiple energy or fuel sources are used, multiple End Uses will be listed)
Space Cooling (if multiple energy or fuel sources are used, multiple End Uses will be listed)
Pumps
Heat Rejection (this item contains energy for cooling tower fans)
Fans - Interior
Receptacle Equipment
Service Water Heating
(see discussion section at the end of this topic for description of contents of each of the above standard end use items)
Following these standard items are any end use items specified from the Misc. Energy Use tab of the Building Properties window. Items
will appear in the order they are defined in HAP. Typically these items will involve such end uses as exterior lighting, and elevators and
escalators..
8. Baseline Building Annual Energy Cost by Energy Type contains energy cost information for the four Baseline Buildings and the
Baseline average found on the "Performance Outputs 1" tab of the Performance Calculator spreadsheet. In this table each row contains
data for one energy or fuel source. Columns contain the energy type name, the energy cost for the four Baseline Buildings and the
Baseline average.
9. Performance Rating Table - Performance Rating Method Compliance contains energy consumption and peak demand results of the
Proposed Building versus the Baseline average found on the "Performance Outputs 1" tab of the Performance Calculator spreadsheet. In
this table each row contains data for one End Use energy item. The order of rows is exactly the same as used in the "Baseline Energy
Summary by End Use" table above. Columns in the table list:
a. End Use Name.
b. Unregulated - Whether the end use is unregulated.
c. Energy Type for the end use.
d. Energy Consumption and Demand Units for the end use..
e. Baseline - The average of the four Baseline Building energy consumption and demand for the end use.
f. Proposed - The Proposed Building energy consumption and demand results for the end use..
g. Energy / Demand Savings - The energy consumption savings or demand savings of Proposed versus Baseline. This is calculated as
100 x (Baseline - Proposed) / Baseline.
h. End Use Percent Contribution to Total Energy Savings - This is the percent of total energy consumption savings represented by each
end use category.
i. End Use Percent Contribution to Total Cost Savings - This is the percent of total energy cost savings represented by each end use
category.
j. Percent of Total Proposed Site Energy Consumption - This is the percent of total Proposed Building energy consumption represented by
each end use category.
10. Performance Rating Energy Consumption and Cost by Fuel Type - Performance Rating Method Compliance contains the final
energy use and energy cost comparison between the Proposed Building and the Baseline average found on the "Performance Outputs 1"
tab of the Performance Calculator spreadsheet.
Rows in the table list the energy types used in the buildings, and the corresponding energy use and energy cost. A final row lists the total
building energy use in neutral units (kBTU for English units, and kWh for Metric units) plus the total energy cost. In columns from left to
right:
a. The first group of columns lists the energy use and energy cost for the average of the four Baseline Buildings.
b. The second group of columns lists energy use and energy cost for the Proposed Building.
c. A final group lists the percent savings of Proposed versus Baseline. The percent cost savings listed in the totals row is the basis for
determining LEED energy performance points earned.
Page 24 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
LEED Unmet Load Hours
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations ›› 16.3 Building Simulation Reports ››
11. Unmet Loads lists the number of unmet load hours for cooling and heating for the Baseline 0 Degree and Proposed Buildings, and the
difference between the two. The cell in the bottom row of the table indicates compliance with the ASHRAE 90.1 Appendix G requirement
that neither Baseline nor Proposed Building total unmet hours can exceed 300.
12. LEED v4 Credit Points Reference Table lists % cost savings versus LEED v4 Optimize Energy Performance credit points. Percent cost
savings are provided for new construction, existing building renovation, and core and shell scenarios. The corresponding points for each
% savings level are listed for the Healthcare, School, and "all other" LEED rating systems. The percent energy cost savings for the
project is highlighted for each of the rating scenarios to aid in determining credit points.
Discussion
Individual building and HVAC energy uses are assigned to the seven standard End Use categories in the Baseline Performance and
Performance Rating tables as follows:
1. Interior Lighting:
a. Overhead lights
b. Task lights
2. Space Heating
(Separate End Use line items are provided for electric and each fuel use category)
a. Electric energy for all electric heating coils, including heat pump auxiliary heaters.
b. Electric energy for all hot water and steam electric boilers that are related to space heating duty. If a heating plant serves both space
and service hot water (SHW) loads, then all heating energy is reported here since it is not possible to identify how much energy is
required for space heating separately from the energy required to serve SHW loads.
c. Electric energy for self-contained humidifiers
d. Electric energy for compressor heating duty in air source heat pumps and water source heat pumps.
e. "Misc Electric Use" defined for combustion heaters and combustion boilers related to space heating duty.
f. Fuel use by all combustion space heaters including heat pump auxiliary heaters.
g. Fuel use by all hot water and steam combustion boilers that are related to space heating duty. If a heating plant serves both space and
service hot water (SHW) loads, then all heating energy is reported here since it is not possible to identify how much energy is required
for space heating separately from the energy required to serve SHW loads.
h. Fuel use by self-contained humidifiers.
i. Remote hot water and remote steam use related to space heating equipment.
3. Space Cooling
(Separate End Use line items are provided for electric and each fuel use category)
a. Electric energy for compressors in DX cooling equipment (rooftops, splits, VPACs, DX FCUs)
b. Electric energy for compressor cooling duty in air source heat pumps and water source heat pumps.
c. Electric energy for electric chillers.
d. Fuel use by fuel-driven chillers and direct-fired absorption chillers.
e. Remote steam and remote HW use by absorption and steam-driven chillers.
f. Fuel use by HW and steam boilers serving absorption chillers.
g. "Misc Electric Use" defined for absorption and fuel driven chillers.
h. Remote chilled water energy use.
4. Pumps
a. Electric energy for all water pumps found in chilled water, hot water, condenser water, WSHP, and service hot water circulation loops.
5. Heat Rejection
a. Fan energy for cooling towers and dry coolers..
6. Fans - Interior
a. Electric energy for supply, return, terminal, zone heating unit, ventilation and exhaust fans.
b. Electric energy for ventilation reclaim devices such as heat recovery wheels, energy recovery wheels, and pump around systems..
7. Receptacle Equipment
a. Electric energy use defined via the "Electric Equipment" input item in space inputs.
8. Service Water Heating
(Separate End Use line items are provided for electric and each fuel use category)
a. Electric energy for electric boilers or heat pumps supplying heat in a standalone SHW system.
b. Fuel use for combustion boilers supplying heat in a standalone SHW system.
Note: If a plant serves both space heating and SHW loads, then energy use by the boilers or heat pumps is categorized under Space
Heating since it is not possible to identify how much input energy is required for space heating separately from energy required for SHW
loads.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
LEED Unmet Load Hours
This topic describes the derivation of LEED unmet load hours which appear in the "Section 1.3 - Advisory Messages" portion of the LEED EA
Credit 1 Summary Reports.
Page 25 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
Background. The Performance Rating Method defined in Appendix G of ASHRAE Standard 90.1-2007 specifies in section G3.1.2.2 that
cooling and heating unmet load hours be determined and shall not exceed certain limits. Further, Standard 90.1-2007 defines the term
"unmet load hour" as follows:
unmet load hour: an hour in which one or more zones is outside the thermostat setpoint range.
In an actual HVAC system any deficiency in the cooling or heating capacity of an HVAC system will manifest itself as zone air temperatures
that are too hot or too cold versus the thermostat setpoint range. Therefore zone air temperatures are an indication of whether the HVAC
equipment can or cannot meet building loads. While this definition is simple and clear, some thought is required when applying this to
energy simulation programs. That's because a simulation program creates a virtual representation of the building that is a simplification of
reality. Specifically, nearly all programs decouple the air side and equipment side simulations and feedback between the two simulations, if it
exists, is imperfect. As a result Carrier believes proper implementation of the LEED unmet load hour concept requires looking at problems
both in the air side simulation and the equipment side simulation. If both parts of the decoupled simulation are not considered, the intent of
the unmet load hour requirements in G3.1.2.2 are not met.
Derivation Procedure. To aid in explaining the procedure for deriving LEED unmet load hours, consider a simple example:
The HVAC system for a small building is a VAV rooftop unit which provides air to VAV/RH terminals serving five zones. A hot water boiler
serves the reheat coils in the VAV boxes. The cooling thermostat setpoint is 76 F, the heating thermostat setpoint is 70 F and the
thermostat throttling range is 2 F.
The derivation procedure can be thought of as assembling a large spreadsheet of system and equipment performance data and then
distilling the LEED unmet load hours from this data. The spreadsheet contains one column for each of the 8,760 hours in a standard year.
Figure 1 illustrates a tiny segment of this spreadsheet containing 11 hours from one summer day. One group of rows in the spreadsheet
contains air temperature data for the zones in the building. This data is obtained from the air-side simulations. In the example in Figure 1
there are 5 rows for the five VAV zones. A second group of rows contains data for each equipment unit such as DX cooling, DX heat pump,
combustion heater, and electric heating devices, and chilled water, hot water and steam plants. The data in these rows indicate whether the
equipment capacity is sufficient to meet the cooling or heating demand each hour. In the example in Figure 1 there is one row for the rooftop
DX cooling equipment and one row for the hot water boiler plant.
Using this spreadsheet concept, the derivation procedure is as follows:
1. Collect Zone Air Temperature Data
First, collect zone air temperature results from the air-side simulations and place the values in the zone air temperature cells in the
spreadsheet. Sample results are shown in Figure 1.
Then evaluate the temperatures to identify which are inside and outside the thermostat operating range. In our example temperatures
above 78 F (setpoint of 76 F plus 2 F range) or below 68 F (setpoint of 70 F minus 2 F range) are out of range. As a practical matter HAP
uses a 1.0 F tolerance, so any temperature 79.0 F and above or 67.0 F and below in our example will be identified as an unmet load
condition. In Figure 1 out-of-range hours are color coded as orange, and those in-range are color coded as green.
2. Collect Equipment Capacity Data
Next, collect equipment capacity data from the equipment-side simulations. For each equipment operating hour, HAP identifies whether
the equipment capacity is sufficient to meet the demand or is deficient. As a practical matter HAP uses a 0.5% tolerance. Any hour in
which the demand exceeds capacity by 0.5% or more is identified as an unmet load condition. In Figure 1, cells in which equipment
capacity is deficient ("Def") by 0.5% or more are color coded orange, and those for which capacity is sufficient ("OK") are color coded
green.
3. Identify LEED Unmet Loads for Each Hour
Once all the zone air temperature and equipment capacity data is assembled for the year, HAP scans the data to distill the LEED unmet
load hours.
Any hour in which one or more zones is above the cooling range (greater than or equal to 79.0 F in our example), or one or more cooling
equipment units has deficient capacity is assigned 1 cooling unmet load hour. In Figure 1, hour 0800 has three zones above the cooling
range. By the Standard 90.1 definition this counts as 1 cooling unmet load hour, not 3 unmet hours. The unmet load tally is shown at the
bottom of the spreadsheet in Figure 1.
Any hour in which one or more zones is below the heating range (less than or equal to 67.0 F in our example), or one or more heating
equipment units has deficient capacity is assigned 1 heating unmet load hour. Because Figure 1 shows an example for a summer day, no
heating unmet load hours appear.
4. Count Annual Unmet Load Hours
Finally, the total annual cooling unmet load hours are determined by summing the values in the "Cooling Unmet" row of the spreadsheet.
The total annual heating unmet load hours are determined by summing the values in the "Heating Unmet" row of the spreadsheet. These
annual sums are the values shown in the "Section 1.3 - Advisory Messages" section of the LEED EA Credit 1 Summary report.
Notes. Please note the following about the LEED Unmet Load Hour derivation:
a. A particular hour of the year can count as no more than 1 cooling unmet load hour and 1 heating unmet load hour.
b. HAP tallies a cooling unmet load hour if the air temperature in one or more zones is 1.0 F or more above the cooling thermostat range or
one or more DX cooling units or chilled water plants is 0.5% or more deficient in capacity versus the cooling demand.
c. HAP tallies a heating unmet load hour if the air temperature in one or more zones is 1.0 F or more below the heating thermostat range or
one or more DX heat pump, combustion heater or electric heater units or hot water plant or steam plant is 0.5% or more deficient in
capacity versus the heating demand.
d. The derivation procedure described above is used for both the LEED NC-2.2 and LEED 2009 versions of the LEED EA Credit 1 Summary
Report.
e. The air system Zone Temperature and Unmet Load reports, and the plant Unmet Load reports show statistics derived from the same raw
material used for distilling LEED Unmet Load Hours. However, the derivation and use of the data on these reports is different from the
Page 26 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm
LEED Unmet Load Hour data. These three reports, which existed long before USGBC or LEED existed, are intended to help users
diagnose modeling problems. As a result they show bulk statistics - the total numbers of zone-hours when temperatures are in and out of
range, and total number of equipment-hours when capacity is sufficient and deficient. Except in the simplest cases, such as a building with
one zone and one equipment unit, the sum of unmet loads and zone temperature hours shown on these reports will be larger than the
LEED unmet load hours reported on the LEED EA Credit 1 Summary. That is because the unmet load hours on the LEED report count no
more than 1 cooling unmet hour and 1 heating unmet hour for each particular hour of the year. The Zone Temperature and Unmet Load
reports display all hours, regardless of whether they coincide during the same hour of the year.
Figure 1.
Copyright © 1999-2018 Carrier Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Page 27 of 27
16.0 Performing Energy Simulations
3/5/2026
file:///C:/Users/User/AppData/Local/Temp/~hh5754.htm